If a woman often loss his baby after he is born, people make a kind of ceremony for the new one born, and this ceremony is about giving to the new baby another name that help the newest stay alive.
This name comes from another person, which means that this person buys the baby from the biologic parents.
This person must not be part of the whole family of the baby, he must be from another family, another village, another city or another region or ethnical group or another country, but the best situation is when this person is from another country (foreigner).
The ceremony is done as follow: the family of the newest baby goes on the road, and leave the baby in the middle of the road (of course not the road where cars can kill the child) and goes to hide in the bush or in the forest close to the road to see who will pass through the road and take the baby.
When somebody passes through the road and finds and takes the baby, in this time, the family notices the person and if the family doesn’t know who is it, he simply follow the person in secret to know where the person live or where the person leave the child.
After then, the family simply waiting for information about a baby find on the road, and the family goes and said it is our child.
All this happen in some hours.
The family gives an opportunity to the person who finds the child to be he’s second father.
At this time this person gives a name he wants to the child, but this child can be named Fɔfɔe or Ofɔe or Oƒle if this person doesn’t give any name to the child.
This person who becomes the second father of the child has close right like the biologic parents, for instance can request to raise the child of course after some years or the child can visit him in holidays or ask for help or advice in difficult situations.
This fact protect the child from the quickly death as this woman observes in the past for her babies because this baby has another name and the death can’t recognize him.
Time to time the biologic family and the second father discuss about some matters connected to the child.
I have to mention that the person who finds the child must be a man another way, the ceremony must be done again in other that the person who will take the baby must be a man.
(This ceremony is close to the history about Moses in the Bible)
FUNERAL CEREMONIES IN EWE ETHNICAL GROUPS LAND
In Ewe ethnical groups, the ceremony about funerals is different, but those differences are not so important.
We can notice some deep ceremony in some Ewe groups, but it is just some specific add from the particular group or family.
When one-person die in one Ewe family, the dead family brings the dead body to the closest hospital where the family will pay for place to freeze the dead body.
This body can stay in freezer until the dead family realize that their ready to start the funerals.
Then, the family will contact with the chief of the village or of the neighbourhood if it is in the city to have an approval to bury the dead body in the village or neighbourhood cemetery.
In Kpalimé region (one specific Ewe group), this approval from the chief is an important issue, they call it "eku tsitsi " that means information about the dead person.
This ceremony is a meeting with the chief and other people living in this neighbourhood or village in which the dead family has to tell the last moment of life of the dead person.
This meeting hang on Thursdays that follow the Friday on which will stand the vigil.
All the meeting start as follow; the dead family speaks about the fact that is responsible for the person death, this can be sickness or disease, or fire burn, or accident on road or in farm or in office.
The family suppose to tell exactly the things that happen at the last moment, like the suffering, the help that the family provide to save his life from death before he died.
From this information, people who stand there with the chief and his speakers will try to ask many questions to check if the family has some responsibility in this death or if this death is connected with another person that willing to short this person life.
And if is happen that anybody or the death family has some responsibility in this person death, the responsible person must pay a fee.
This fee can be goats, sheep and or some specific drinks or other things else.
This kind of action will delete or free the relation between the dead person and the life person.
After this meeting which held on Thursday, Friday night will be the vigil (spending all Friday night for the dead person), the dead family will go to the hospital and receive the dead body and in the evening or in the night, the family will arrive with the dead body in the place where they prepare everything for the last exposition of the dead body.
But before that time, the people from the neighborhood or from the village help the dead family to build some tent or hut for the funerals.
The vigil starts from the evening and continues till the next day morning.
During this time everything go as follow: firstly, Christian starts the vigil if the dead person is believe in God, and then they observe Mass till midnight, and then the drams music will continue the vigil. This dram groups can be one of the dead person group (means that he belong to this group) or the dead family simply order music to enjoy the last moment of the death.
Secondly, if the dead person is belonging to any kind of fetish group, then the whole night will be covered by dram music from the fetish group.
We have to notice that, this kind of specific dram music is very important and common in all Ewe regions.
That music from dram tells in a precise and direct way good-bye and good journey to the dead person.
During the vigil in the memory of the dead person, it is allow for everybody to visit the dead body at his exposition. And those people can be the dead family, the friend, the relations and so on, just an opportunity for them to say personal last good-bye.
But before this permission for visiting the dead body, they have special ceremony called "abaɖoɖo " which simply means to "prepare the bed " in which they make sleep the death in some specific way that some time you fill like the person is alive.
We must know that, if the dead person is disciple of fetish, the vigil and the burial ceremonies are done following the rule of the fetish, some time the dead family is not allow to follow some ceremonies done by the fetish group.
We have to remember also that, if the dead person is a member of fetish group, this group doesn’t allow the dead family to freeze the dead body.
They simply short the term of the funerals during three days and of course according to the fetish rules.
The second day of the funerals is Saturday, is the burial ceremonies day.
In Saturday morning, generally women walk on the road close to the place of funerals singing pity songs to call the dead person spirit out of the Village or the neighborhood, and before the last Mass of the presence of dead body, they have another ceremony named « ame dede aɖakame » which means "put in the coffin ".
It happen as follow, the dead family and Priest if the dead person believes in God and the representative of fetish if the dead person belong to fetish group, go to the dead body and put the body in the coffin with some specific traditional words from the dead family and the representative of the fetish group (It depend and it done according to the kind of the death).
After then they will observe with the people Mass or fetish ceremonies for the last benediction of the dead person.
At the last moment, they will bring the coffin with the dead person to the cemetery where they pray and make the burial ceremonies.
The third day which is Sunday, they have generally Mass for the dead person, and in evening, the dead family distribute drinks for everybody that help during the funerals; chief and people that act during ceremonies.
We have to mention that funerals ceremonies make a lot of spending on the expense of the dead family, and often the dead family borrow money to cover the spending to show how wealthy is the family.
It is a king of competition between families to show their capacity (It doesn’t make sense, but is how it works in Ewe ethnical groups).
The funeral ceremonies are very important ones among Ewe community’s ceremonies.
It is a time when the whole family stands together to be in relation with the dead person, and pray for God who comes from heaven to take pity on him, and receive him in peace.
Marriage according to Eʋe tradition.
According to the tradition of Eʋe population, marriage is an important tradition event that young men and women likely wait for when the rich the age that allow them to participate in this ceremony.
With respect to ancient time ceremonies, the lovers do not have to know each other before taking marriage.
The ceremony goes as follow; the family of the boy will find for him his lover and the family will try to make the family of the girl agree, and this takes few days or month, it depends on each family how the appreciate the offer.
The family of the boy has to go to the family of the girl three times according to the tradition to fulfill the marriage ceremony. How it works!
To say it shortly, this is the way how the boy’s family ask about marriage to the girl’s family.
In this period the two families try to know each other very well and try to accept each other in sense of allowing the marriage between their children and such period is very important for the whole ceremony.
We generally call this period "knock the door " and will now see his explanation:
A chosen people from the boy’s family (generally the uncles of the boy) will go according to the ceremony earlier in the morning to nock to the door of the girl’s family (generally the uncles of the girl) and this people will receive them and ask about the matter.
The boy’s uncles simply reply to the girl’s uncle that they would like to get married with one of their girl (and of course they give the name of the girl) and they give three bottle of alcohol (it depends on every family how much they think is enough).
Then the uncle of the girl will let the boy’s uncles know that he will report their intention to the girl’s father and will send then information or propose them another day to come for the answer, it depends.
And then the boy’s uncles ask for leaving and go back home to report it to the father of the boy.
The same people from the boy’s family will return again to get the answer from the father of the girl (but sometimes the uncle of the girl can send previously the answer to the boy’s uncles if it is yes or no).
If it is happen that the girl’s father says yes, the same people from the boy’s family return back again to hear about their duties concerning the marriage of the girl and their son.
An example of their duties; drinks (soft drinks, alcohols for example local one like SOƉABI or from abroad like gins, palm wine etc…), cloth (like special home cloth for example loin cloth, wax Hollanders etc.. with some specific quantities, jewelry and so on), money (the girl’s family gives some specific amount, the minimum, some part goes to the family and another part goes to the girl in intention that the girl can start doing business with this money and be safe from hunger), salt (it depend on each family, the will spend this salt in the family and close relation to let them know that their girl get married), and many other things…..
When the boy’s family is ready (means they buy every think), they will send information to the girl’s family that they would like to come and fulfill their duties to get into the marriage ceremony.
We have to notice that in the pass the lovers do not know each other during this period of consultation, but sometimes some people let the boy or the girl know about the information and this bad intention and those people can be punished if their recognized by the families involve in the ceremony.
Why that simply because the girl or the boy can run away from their family if they don’t want get married.
Marriage was very important in the pass according to Eʋe tradition in sense that it is the family that chooses the partner for their son or daughter in fear that the boy or girl will not suffer or have difficult life.
It will be the time when the lovers will officially discover their partner for life.
The ceremony goes as follow: some special speech come from the both family with happiness, with drinking times, with the sound of drams, with special dancing times with appreciation of the couple and so on…
Here we have to know that sometimes it is difficult for the couple to enjoy this time because it happen that they do not like each other, but nevertheless, they have to show that their happy because of their parents.
When the ceremony is still on, the girl’s father takes her hand and gives her to the boy’s family and says for example, I give you my daughter; you have to take care of her that she will never suffer from hunger or will not have difficult life and they will say yes we will take care of her and give her better life.
And at the end the boy’s family come home with the girl and gives her to the boy.
(About the virginity of the girl is very important from the boy’s family but nevertheless I am not going deeply about this fact here).
People take care of this marriage ceremony in pass, but these days’ people do not respect this marriage ceremony.
People taking these days marriage everywhere without parents acceptance, people meet each other on road, in pub, dram music places decide about marriage without parents intervention, taking marriage only with regard with the law, in church and other places.
But we must notice that a lot of people still in respect with ancient time marriage ceremonies, and some foreign people come sometimes specially in taking part in this traditional marriage and go back to their country because the fill special after all.
No matter where the lovers find themselves or where they get married, the boy must find out the girl’s family and fulfill his duties about traditional married, it is very important in Eʋe tradition.
If not, and it happens that the member of the girl’s family died or the girl’s herself died, before this boy will be receive officially by his step-family he has to fulfill this marriage ceremony entirely according to the tradition and it complicated because he has to fulfill more duties.
The name of my grandfather is Kodjovi Akpa Afoutou, with clear complexion skin; he is a known person from Tado-Domé which located at the East-South side of the country.
Shortly, he was animist and had a group of people who worship "Vodu " and who can cure disease, speak about people problem and can read things in future.
He has composed many songs to glorify « Vodu » and as well during ceremonies for the same purpose.
He had been doing this till he seriously converted into Catholicism.
He was truly converted that he finished everything with Satan and its duties.
He started compose songs for worshiping God and those song were sung in Church by people to glorify God during the celebration of Mass.
People knew his songs and they were useful for the Mass that they invited him to sing during the celebration of Mass when Pope John II came to Togo in August 1985, and then after the Mass he went to sing for Pope.
I have to mention that, at that time we have in our village Tado-Domé, two Priests from Poland who were catholic missionaries.
One of his best songs was "God’s words are sweet " and the song’s words were:
God’s words are sweet
Akpan says God’s words are too sweet
Somebody refuse the word in morning
In evening he will meet trouble (or accident)
chorus:
Salt is sweet
Yehowa says salt is sweet
The salt that refuse to be sweet
It will be throwing away and walk over.
My name is AFOUTOU Djoubogbé Kossi, I was born in May 24, 1981.
My father’s name is Kounoudzi from Tado-Domé (Moyen-Mono) and my mother’s name is Akouvi from Kouma-Aɖamé (Kloto).
I have two sisters and two brothers.
I was graduated at University of Lomé and I had master in "Accounting, Business Administration and Management " in 2006.
I came to Poland for the first time in 2007 for an internship through AIESEC in teaching entrepreneurship and culture in Wielkopolska region’s high schools.
At this time I notice that it is an opportunity for me to study here.
And when I return back to Togo in January 15, 2008 I plan to continuous my studies here (in Poznan), because the tuition fee is cheaper and I wanted as well to study in English.
I came back in August 15, 2008 till today.
I am a gentleman who fights for justice, truth and peace and I work hard because I believe that only real work can bring freedom to everybody.
My ambition is to change something in this world, fight for peace and help poor and suffering people.
My target is first to work for company and open my own business in the future.
And my motto is "African countries want to be free ".
DAYS IN THE WEEK WITH THEIR STEREOTIPES
Mean while almost every person from Ewe group is named according to the day in the week on which he or she was born.
And it easy to remember the day in the week on which one person was born, because each day in the week has a specific name, which is connected with Ewe culture.
The person using one of those names are easily identify as Ewe ethnical group descendant.
We are going to provide information about the names, their meaning and their stereotype in the coming words:
MONDAY: Day one – Monday’s natives
Descendant from Ewe group named as follow:
Boys: Kɔdzo, Kɔdzo, Kɔdzovi, Kɔdzogã, Kudzo, Kudzovi, Kudzogã
Girls: Adzo, Adzovi, Adzogã, Adzowavi, Adzowagã, Adzowa, Adzotɔ.
Life style of Monday’s natives and their spirit gift from the creator Monday’s natives are generally shy, they do not hurry much about things, even though they could, they do think over before taken appropriate action according to the situation.
They do not like to offend or hurt people and they suffer if it happens that they do hurt or make other people sad.
Monday’s natives are people who love very much their partner or their friends and they like to offer gift to their close relations or partner to make them happy, they want people to like or love them the same way they did to them, and they easily can offer their life to save others.
Love is very important for them.
They like to make great realizations and they do have great dreams, also they are people that quickly become angry and after few time they become happy.
TUESDAY: Day two – Tuesday’s natives
Boys: Kɔmla, Kɔmlavi, Kɔmlagã
Girls: Abra, Abravi, Abragã, Abrewavi, Abrewagã, Abrewa
Life style of Tuesday’s natives and their spirit gift from the creator Tuesday’s natives, are people that have a great gift of general over view about humans, they know humans characteristics well.
They like to enjoy themselves and their relations.
They like to express their feelings to people, and they can use their time or moment doing so.
They like to be close and listen to people, their understanding is an example but in the same way they become quickly angry.
They like to be leader or chief or responsible for something.
They are happy people and they do have very great mind mean while they are rational people and they do things true.
The natives of Tuesday are intelligent people, they observe great studying and the have success in professional life.
They like to share and welcome people.
WEDNESDAY: Day three – Wednesday’s natives
Descendant from Ewe group named as follow:
Boys: Kɔku, Kɔkuvi, Kɔkugã
Girls: Aku, Akuvi, Akugã, Akuwa, Akuwavi, Akuwagã, Akutɔ
Life style of Wednesday’s natives and their spirit gift from the creator From the beginning, the natives of Wednesday are full of bravery and spontaneity or quickness and sometimes they do things with spontaneity.
They are courageous people and further more they are people who tell true in many circumstances.
Their spontaneity some times, in some actions make their relations perplex or unhappy.
They really open their heart to relations and they like to be very close to their relations.
They usually want to be an example in family’s life, but often, lack of understanding or incomprehension make their family every day life unhappy or perplex.
They do manual work very well.
They usually like to be part of enjoyment activities mean while they look very good.
THURSDAY: Day four –Thursday’s natives
Boys: Yawo, Yawovi, Yawogã
Girls: Yawa, Yawavi, Yawagã, Ayawa
Life style of Thursday’s natives and their spirit gift from the creator Thursday’s natives are people that use only their knowledge and their mind to do things, simply because they do not listen to advises, and this attitude of avoiding advises make them do things according to their mind or their heart.
They do things as fast as possible only to avoid advises.
They are people who can easily study or who can easily do manual works, but because of their attitude of avoiding advises their studies or the improvement of their intelligent have limit in their life.
But they behave very well in family relations and they take care of family very good because they have master of speech and conversation between people.
They can be easily angry and their anger last long.
FRIDAY: Day five – Friday’s natives
Boys: Kofi, Kofivi, Kofigã
Girls: Afi, Afivi, Afigã, Afiwavi, Afiwa, Afiwagã, Afiyo
Life style of Friday’s natives and their spirit gift from the creator The natives of Friday are the most courageous people, they work hard, very strong, and they are very determined people.
Friday’s natives are open mind people and their very clever people in a family or in a country.
Their determination helps them to study and to do manual work very well.
They have very good ideas and they respect people in very good conditions.
They love their wife and their children very much and taking care of family is the most important thing in their point of view.
But, the natives of Friday are very jealous and they do not share with people without reason, they help people when it is needed.
SATURDAY: Day six – Saturday’s natives
Boys: Kɔmi, Kɔmivi, Kɔmigã, Kwami, Kwame
Girls: Ami, Amivi, Amigã, Ama, Amevi, Amagã, Ameyo
Life style of Saturday’s natives and their spirit gift from the creator Saturday’s natives are people generally calm and they do not make troubles.
They are good in relations with people, they use their time helping people and they are often deeply sorry about bad things that happen to people.
They are loyal to people, they love with truth and trust, they tell truth but they don’t like to show themselves or show any kind of self-considerations to people.
The Saturday’s natives are in average shy people, they don’t become quickly angry, they watch out everything very carefully and they remember everything very well, they succeed in many things and they are full of blessing from God.
SUNDAY: Day seven – Sunday’s natives
Boys: Kɔsi, Kɔsivi, Kɔsigã, Kwasi
Girls: Kɔsiwa, Kɔsiwavi, Kɔsiwagã, Akɔsiwa
Life style of Sunday’s natives and their spirit gift from the creator The natives of Sunday are spirit child, God stand in their spirit and they are also people who have a mission of accomplishment.
They enjoy in their life freedom and independence.
They easily feel compassion or sympathy for people, they usually hold on situations, competition and determination are their strength or power.
They have inside themselves strong love, and they love with all their strength during their whole life.
They study very dearly and they have often very successful professional life, because they have very clear and bright mind.
They usually have ambition to be leader or chief or manager, and everywhere they are, their attitudes prove their leadership.
They think very easily and very much, they have ideas for doing things, and they give very good advises.
They are people who open their heart and share their goodness with people.
This work shows three things in Ewe ethnical groups: the naming process, remembrance of the day of birth in the week and the spirit gift or meaning connected with name.
Often the description above happens exactly in people’s life.
What if I’m Addicted to Pornography?
What you can do
Understand pornography for what it is.
Pornography is nothing less than an attempt to degrade something that God created to be honorable.
Understanding pornography in this light will help you to "hate what is bad. "
Psalm 97:10.
Consider the consequences.
Pornography devalues those depicted in it.
It also debases the person who views it.
For good reason, the Bible says: "Shrewd is the one that has seen the calamity and proceeds to conceal himself. "
Proverbs 22:3.
Make a commitment.
"I have made a solemn promise never to look with lust at a girl, " said the faithful man Job.
(Job 31:1, Today’s English Version)
The following are some ‘solemn promises’ you could make:
I will not use the Internet when I am alone.
I will immediately exit from any pop-up or site that is explicit.
I will talk to a mature friend if I have a relapse.
Hands being entangled with string
Pornography has a cumulative effect the more times you view it, the harder it is to break free
Pray about it.
The psalmist implored Jehovah God: "Make my eyes pass on from seeing what is worthless. "
(Psalm 119:37)
God wants you to succeed, and if you pray to him he can give you the strength to do what is right!
Philippians 4:13.
Talk to someone.
Choosing a confidant is often an important step in breaking the habit.
Proverbs 17:17.
Remember this: Each time you avoid pornography, you have won a significant victory.
Tell Jehovah God about that victory, and thank him for the strength he has given you.
By avoiding pornography, you make his heart rejoice!
Proverbs 27:11.
Besides enabling your children to have heart-to-heart conversations with you, knowing your language gives them other advantages.
However, there is great advantage in having brothers handle the same assignments for some time in order for them to gain experience and proficiency.
There are advantages to traveling with a companion.
When saving seats or when getting in line to obtain convention releases, we should seek, not our own advantage, but that of the other person.
Take advantage of the opportunity to evaluate how you are using your life.
TAKING advantage of the time he spent waiting for his traveling companions in Athens, the apostle Paul engaged in informal witnessing.
Also, there is a correct timetable for this input to come for the best results, and that advantageous time is during the formative years.
One advantage of the provision to auxiliary pioneer is its flexibility.
He will surely equip us to face trials if we take full advantage of his spiritual provisions supplied through his Word and "the faithful and discreet slave. "
Matthew 24:45.
In his first letter to Timothy, Paul highlighted principles that should govern Christian slaves, some of whom may have expected material advantages because of having Christian owners.
Vincent, a father of four, says: "Often, we would talk through the advantages and disadvantages of a situation so that our children could see for themselves the best outcome.
The Athenians used the trireme’s advantages in their crucial victory over the Persian navy at Salamis in 480 B.C.E.
(1 Corinthians 6:12) Thus, many today who desire to be Jehovah’s Witnesses see the need of saying no even to things that although lawful are of no advantage or are of little lasting value.
The Question Box in the June 1977 Our Kingdom Service stated: "It is best not to exploit theocratic associations by either initiating or advertising the sale of any goods or services for commercial advantage in the Kingdom Hall, at congregation book studies and at assemblies of Jehovah’s people.
Why damage it by resorting to something dishonest in order to save face or gain some illegal advantage?
Envy is defined as "the painful or resentful awareness of an advantage enjoyed by another, accompanied by a desire to possess the same advantage. "
16 In 1946 a need was seen for a fresh Bible translation that took advantage of the latest scholarship and was not tainted by dogmas based on traditions of Christendom.
Have I taken full advantage of the provisions to attend meetings with fellow believers?
And both criminals and disease viruses have exploited the advantages of globalization more efficiently than governments.
See boxes on pages 8 and 9.
Shunem and Gilboa offered such advantages.
Parents, what your children need most from you is, not material advantages, but you your time, energy, and love.
Whatever its advantages, though, a long-distance romance presents some unique challenges.
His parents were moderately wealthy, and he tasted the advantages of money at an early age, receiving an education in Rome under the renowned grammarian Donatus.
11 The more words, the more futility; and what advantage do they bring to man?
Certainly, if you find yourself needing help, you can take full advantage of these provisions.
I’m Attracted to the Same Sex Does That Mean I’m Gay?
Not at all!
Fact: In many cases, same-sex attraction is nothing more than a passing phase.
That’s what Lisette, 16, who was at one time attracted to a girl, found.
She says: "Through my biology classes in school, I learned that during the adolescent years, hormone levels can fluctuate greatly.
I truly think that if more youths knew more about their bodies, they would understand that same-sex attraction can be temporary and they wouldn’t feel the pressure to be gay. "
A youth at a crossroads deciding which road to follow
All youths face a choice either to adopt the world’s degraded view of sexuality or to follow the high moral path set forth in God’s Word
But what if your attraction to the same sex seems to be more than a passing phase?
Is it cruel of God to tell someone who is attracted to the same sex to avoid homosexuality?
If you answered yes to that last question, you should know that such reasoning is based on the flawed notion that humans must act on their sexual impulses.
The Bible dignifies humans by assuring them that they can choose not to act on their improper sexual urges.​ Colossians 3:5.
The Bible’s stand is not unreasonable.
It simply directs those with homosexual urges to do the same thing that is required of those with an opposite-sex attraction​ to "flee from fornication. " (1 Corinthians 6:18)
The fact is, millions of heterosexuals who wish to conform to the Bible’s standards employ self-control despite any temptations they might face.
Those with homosexual inclinations can do the same if they truly want to please God.​ Deuteronomy 30:19.
How Can I Explain My Beliefs About Sex?
"What​ you’re still a virgin? "
If you want to give an answer and your answer is yes, would you like to be able to say it with confidence?
This article will help you!
What is a virgin?
What does the Bible say about sex?
What do you believe?
How can you explain your belief to others?
A virgin is someone who has never had sexual intercourse.
But, of course, intercourse is not the only form of sexual activity.
Some may label themselves as "technical virgins " because they haven’t had intercourse​ even if they’ve done just about everything else.
The word "sex " can refer, for example, to such things as oral sex, anal sex, or masturbating another person.
The bottom line: People who have engaged in sex​ including oral sex, anal sex, or masturbating another person​ cannot say that they are virgins.
The Bible says that sexual activity should take place only between a man and a woman who are married to each other.
(Proverbs 5:​18)
Therefore, a person who wants to please God should not engage in sexual activity until he or she gets married.​ 1 Thessalonians 4:​3-5.
Some say that the Bible’s view is old-fashioned and completely out of touch with our modern world.
Keep in mind, though, that our modern world is plagued with divorce, unwanted pregnancies, and sexually transmitted diseases.
Really, our modern world is in no position to dole out advice about morals!​ 1 John 2:​15-​17.
When you think about it, the Bible’s moral code makes sense.
To illustrate: Suppose that someone gave you a gift of $1,000 in cash. Would you throw the money from a rooftop for just anyone passing by to pick up?
You face a similar decision with regard to sex.
"I don’t want to throw away my virginity on someone whose name I may not even remember years from now, " says 14-year-old Sierra.
Tammy, 17, would agree.
"Sex is too special a gift to waste, " she says.
The bottom line: The Bible upholds virginity and clean conduct as the standard for those who aren’t yet married.​ 1 Corinthians 6:​18; 7:​8, 9.
Do you believe that the Bible’s view of sex is reasonable or too strict?
Do you believe that sex is OK if two unmarried people say that they really love each other?
After carefully weighing the matter, many young people have concluded that virginity and clean conduct are the best choice.
They neither regret that decision nor feel deprived.
Consider what some of them have to say:
"I’m glad I’m a virgin!
There’s nothing wrong with avoiding the mental, physical, and emotional pain that comes along with having premarital sex. "​ Emily.
"I’m glad I don’t have a list of failed sexual relationships, and it feels great knowing that there isn’t even the slightest chance I have an STD. "​ Elaine.
"I’ve heard several girls my age and older say that they regret having had sex and that they wish they had waited, and I don’t want to make the same mistake. "​ Vera.
"I’ve seen so many people with emotional scars and baggage because of losing their virginity or having multiple partners.
In my opinion, that’s a sad way to live. "​ Deanne.
The bottom line: You need to know what you believe before you face pressure or temptation to have sex.​ James 1:​14, 15.
A teenage girl explains her beliefs to a fellow student What should you say if someone questions your belief about sex?
Much depends on the circumstances.
"If someone was teasing me and that was their only motive, I wouldn’t just stand there and take it.
I would say, ‘That’s none of your business,’ and I would walk away. "​ Corinne.
"Unfortunately, some people at school enjoy bullying others just for the fun of it.
If that was their intention in questioning me, I might not reply at all. "​ David.
Did you know?
At times, Jesus used silence to "answer " ridiculers.​ Matthew 26:62, 63.
But what if the person questioning you is respectfully sincere?
If you think that the person might respect the Bible, you could refer to a passage such as 1 Corinthians 6:​18, which says that the person who has premarital sex is sinning against, or harming, his or her own body.
Whether you use the Bible right away or not, it’s important that you speak with conviction.
Remember, you have every right to be proud of your choice to remain morally clean.​ 1 Peter 3:​16.
"Responding with confidence shows that you don’t question or doubt your beliefs and that you do what you do because it’s right, not just because it’s what you were told to do. "​ Jill.
The bottom line: If you have confidence in your stand on sex, you will be able to explain it to others.
And you might be surprised at their response.
"My coworkers have actually commended me for my virginity, " says 21-year-old Melinda.
"They don’t see it as weird.
They see it as a mark of self-control and virtue. "
Tip!
If you need help developing your convictions about sex, download the worksheet "How to Explain Your Beliefs About Sex. "
Also, check out the book Questions Young People Ask​ Answers That Work.
Chapter 24 of Volume 1 is entitled "Will Sex Improve Our Relationship? "
Chapter 5 of Volume 2 is entitled "Why Stay a Virgin? " Victoria
"I love the reasoning in the ‘Young People Ask’ books.
For example, page 187 of Volume 1 illustrates how engaging in premarital sex is like giving away a costly necklace for free.
You cheapen yourself.
Page 177 shows how engaging in premarital sex is like taking a beautiful painting and using it as a doormat.
But my favorite illustration is on page 54 of Volume 2.
The caption says: ‘Engaging in premarital sex is like opening a gift before it has been given to you.’
It’s as if you’re stealing something that belongs to someone else​ your future mate. "​ Victoria.
Should We Break Up?
(Part 1)
Sometimes a breakup is a blessing.
Consider the experience of Jill.
"At first, " she says, "I was flattered that my boyfriend was always worrying about where I was, what I was doing, and whom I was with.
But it got to the point where I couldn’t spend time with anyone but him.
He even got jealous when I spent time with my family​ especially my father.
When I ended the relationship with my boyfriend, I felt as if a huge weight had been lifted off my shoulders! "
Sarah had a similar experience.
She began to notice that John, the young man she was dating, was sarcastic, demanding, and rude.
"One time, " Sarah recalls, "he came to the door three hours late!
He ignored my mother when she answered the door, and then he said: ‘Let’s go.
We’re late.’
Not ‘I’m late,’ but ‘We’re late.’
He should have apologized or explained himself.
Most of all, he should have shown my mother respect! "
Of course, a single disappointing act or trait doesn’t necessarily doom a relationship.
(Psalm 130:3)
But when Sarah realized that John’s rudeness was a pattern rather than an isolated incident, she decided to end the relationship.
What if, like Jill and Sarah, you determine that the person you’re dating wouldn’t make a suitable marriage partner?
In that case, do not ignore your feelings!
Hard as it is to accept, it might be best to end the relationship.
Proverbs 22:3 says: "Shrewd is the one that has seen the calamity and proceeds to conceal himself. "
True, breaking up may not be easy.
But marriage is a permanent bond.
It’s better to live with short-term pain now than suffer with lifelong regret later!
(Part 2)
First, choose a proper setting for the discussion.
What could that be?
Well, think about how you would like to be treated.
(Matthew 7:​12)
Would you want the announcement to be made in front of others?
Likely not.
Unless circumstances make it advisable, it would be best not to terminate a relationship by means of a telephone answering machine, a text message, or an e-mail.
Instead, choose a time and place that will enable you to discuss this serious matter.
What should you say when the time comes to speak up?
The apostle Paul urged Christians to "speak truth " with one another.​ Ephesians 4:​25.
The best course, then, is to be tactful yet firm.
State clearly why you feel that this relationship won’t work for you.
You don’t need to recite a laundry list of faults or let loose with a barrage of criticism.
In fact, instead of saying, "You don’t do this " or "You never do that, " it would be better to use phrases that focus on how you feel​ "I need a person who . . . " or "I feel that this relationship should end because . . . "
This is no time to be wishy-washy or to yield to another’s opinion.
So be cautious if your friend attempts to change your mind through subtle forms of manipulation.
"After I ended the relationship, " says a young woman named Lori, "my ex-boyfriend started acting depressed all the time.
I think he did it to make me feel sorry for him. I did feel bad.
But I didn’t allow his reaction to alter my decision. "
Like Lori, know your own mind.
Let your no mean no.​ James 5:​12.
Am I Ready to Date?
What is dating?
What is the purpose of dating?
Am I old enough to date?
Why wait to date?
What is dating?
You regularly go out with a certain member of the opposite sex.
Are you dating?
You and a member of the opposite sex are attracted to each other.
Several times a day, you send text messages or talk to this person on the phone.
Every time you get together with your friends, you pair off with the same person of the opposite sex.
Are you dating?
You most likely had no problem answering the first question.
But you may have paused before responding to the second and the third.
What exactly is dating?
Really, dating is any social activity in which your romantic interest is focused on one particular person and that person’s interest is focused on you.
So the answer to all three questions is yes.
Whether on the phone or face-to-face, in the open or in secret, if you and a friend of the opposite sex have a special romantic understanding and communicate regularly, it’s dating.
What is the purpose of dating?
Dating should have an honorable purpose to help a young man and woman determine if they want to get married to each other.
Granted, some of your peers might take a casual view of dating.
Perhaps they simply enjoy being with a special friend of the opposite sex, without any intention of marriage.
Some might even view such a friend as little more than a trophy or an accessory to be seen with in public to boost their own self-esteem.
Often, though, such shallow relationships are short-lived.
"Many young ones who date break up with each other a week or two later, " says a girl named Heather.
"They come to view relationships as transitory which in a sense prepares them for divorce rather than for marriage. "
Clearly, when you date someone, you’re affecting that person’s feelings.
So be sure your intentions are honorable.
Luke 6:31.
If you date with no intention of marriage, you are acting like a child who plays with a new toy and then discards it Think:
Would you like someone to play with your feelings as if they were some child’s toy to be picked up for a moment and then quickly abandoned?
Then don’t do that to someone else!
The Bible says that love "does not behave indecently. " 1 Corinthians 13:4, 5.
A youth named Chelsea says: "Part of me wants to say that dating should be just for fun, but it’s no fun when one person is taking it seriously and the other isn’t. "
Tip: To prepare for dating and marriage, read 2 Peter 1:5-7 and pick one quality you need to work on.
In a month’s time, see how much you have learned about and improved in that quality.
Am I old enough to date?
At what age, do you think, is it appropriate for a youth to start dating?
Now ask one of your parents the same question.
Chances are, your answer is different from that of your parent.
Or maybe not!
You might be among the many youths who are wisely putting off dating until they’re old enough to know themselves better.
That’s what Danielle, 17, decided to do.
She says: "Thinking back two years ago, what I would have looked for in a potential mate was so different from what I would look for now.
Basically, even at this point I don’t trust myself to make such a decision.
When I feel that my personality has been stable for a couple of years, then I’ll think about dating. "
There’s another reason why waiting is wise.
The Bible uses the phrase "the bloom of youth " to describe the period of life when sexual feelings and romantic emotions first become strong.
(1 Corinthians 7:36)
To maintain close association with one particular member of the opposite sex while you’re still in this phase can fan the flames of desire and lead to wrong conduct.
True, that might mean little to your peers.
Many of them may be all too eager to experiment with sex.
But you can​ you must ​rise above that kind of thinking!
(Romans 12:2)
After all, the Bible urges you to "flee from sexual immorality. " (1 Corinthians 6:18, New International Version)
By waiting until you’re past the bloom of youth, you can "ward off calamity. "
Ecclesiastes 11:10.
Why wait to date?
Being pressured to date before you’re ready would be like being forced to take a final exam for a course that you’ve barely started.
Obviously, that wouldn’t be fair!
You need time to study your subject so that you can become familiar with the kind of problems you’ll face in the test.
It’s similar with dating.
Dating is no trivial matter.
So before you’re ready to focus on one particular person, you need to take time to study a very important "subject " how to build friendships.
Later, when you meet the right person, you’ll be in a better position to build a solid relationship.
After all, a good marriage is the union of two good friends.
Waiting to date won’t stifle your freedom.
On the contrary, it will give you more freedom to ‘rejoice in your youth.’
(Ecclesiastes 11:9)
You will also have time to prepare yourself by developing your personality and, most important, your spirituality.
Lamentations 3:27.
In the meantime, you can enjoy the company of the opposite sex.
What’s the best way to do so?
Spend time together in properly supervised mixed groups.
A girl named Tammy says: "I think it’s more fun that way.
It’s better to have a lot of friends. "
Monica agrees.
"The group idea is a really good idea, " she says, "because you get to associate with people who have different personalities. "
In contrast, if you focus on one person too soon, you set yourself up for heartache.
So take your time.
Use this period of your life to learn how to cultivate and maintain friendships.
Later, if you choose to date, you’ll have a better idea of who you are and what you need in a lifelong partner.
Is Oral Sex Really Sex?
According to a U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report, about half of all interview respondents from age 15 to 19 have engaged in oral sex.
"If you talk to teens [about oral sex] they’ll tell you it’s not a big deal, " says Sharlene Azam, the author of the book Oral Sex Is the New Goodnight Kiss.
"In fact, they don’t consider it sex. "
What do you think?
What are the facts?
Why does it matter?
Answer the following questions yes or no.
Can a girl get pregnant as a result of giving oral sex?
Yes
No
Does oral sex have any health risks?
Is oral sex really sex?
Compare your answers with those that follow.
Answer: No.
That is one reason why many people conclude​ wrongly​ that oral sex is harmless.
Answer: Yes.
A person who engages in oral sex can contract hepatitis (A or B), genital warts, gonorrhea, herpes, HIV, and syphilis.
Any conduct involving the genitals of another person​ including intercourse, oral sex, anal sex, and masturbating another person​ constitutes sex.
Consider several scriptures in the Bible that relate to the topic of oral sex.
The Bible says: "This is the will of God, that you should . . . abstain from sexual immorality. "​ 1 Thessalonians 4:​3.
The original-​language word translated "sexual immorality " refers to all forms of intimate conduct outside of marriage, including intercourse, oral sex, anal sex, and masturbating another person.
A person who engages in sexual immorality can reap serious consequences, the most tragic of which is a damaged friendship with God.​ 1 Peter 3:12.
The Bible says: "Whoever practices sexual immorality is sinning against his own body. "​ 1 Corinthians 6:18.
Oral sex can have harmful physical and spiritual consequences.
It can also take an emotional toll.
"Feeling used, regretful, or vulnerable is not unique to vaginal sex, " says the book Talking Sex With Your Kids.
"All of the bad emotions someone might experience from having intercourse in the wrong situation can be experienced from having any type of sex in the wrong situation.
Sex is sex. "
The Bible says: "I, Jehovah, am your God, the One teaching you to benefit yourself. "​ Isaiah 48:​17.
Do you believe that God’s laws regarding sex really benefit you?
Or do you think that they restrict you? To help you answer those questions, think of a busy highway with posted speed limits, traffic signals, and stop signs.
Do you view those signs and signals as a restriction or as a protection?
What would happen if you​ and other drivers​ ignored them?
A driver ignores a road sign and heads the wrong way into oncoming traffic
Traffic laws restrict your freedom, but they protect you.
Similarly, God’s laws place restrictions on you, but they safeguard you
It is similar with God’s standards.
If you ignore them, you are sure to reap what you sow.
(Galatians 6:7)
"The more you abandon your beliefs and values and engage in activities you don’t feel right about, the less you’ll respect yourself, " says the book Sex Smart.
In contrast, if you live in accord with God’s standards, you will show true moral character.
More than that, you will maintain a clean conscience.​ 1 Peter 3:16.
Am I Ready for Marriage?
Before you can answer that question, you need to know yourself well.
For example, consider the following factors:
Relationships
Do you often lose your self-control with them, perhaps using harsh or sarcastic language to make a point?
What would they say about you in that regard?
How you deal with family members indicates how you will treat a mate.​ Ephesians 4:31.
Demeanor
Are you positive or pessimistic?
Are you reasonable, or do you always insist on doing things a certain way your way?
Can you keep calm when under pressure?
Are you patient?
Cultivating the fruitage of God’s spirit now will help you prepare for being a husband or a wife later.​ Galatians 5:22, 23.
Finances
How well do you handle money?
Are you often in debt?
Can you hold down a job?
If not, why not?
Is it because of the job?
The employer? Or is it because of some habit or trait that you need to work on?
If you have trouble handling your own finances, how will you manage those of a family?​ 1 Timothy 5:8.
Spirituality
Do you take the initiative to read God’s Word, to engage in the ministry, and to participate at Christian meetings?
The person you marry deserves nothing less than a spiritually strong partner.​ Ecclesiastes 4:9, 10.
The more you understand yourself, the better equipped you will be to find someone who will amplify your strengths rather than your weaknesses.
Is This Person Right for Me?
Have you found someone who might be a good marriage partner?
If so, how can you tell if that person is right for you?
It’s vital that you look beyond superficial traits.
After all, the cutest girl may not be trustworthy or the most popular boy may not be morally upright.
You want someone you’ll be comfortable with​ someone who truly fits your personality and your goals.​ Genesis 2:18; Matthew 19:​4-6.
Looking Beyond the Surface
Look at your friend objectively.
Be careful, though!
You might be inclined to see only what you want to see.
Try to perceive your friend’s true nature.
Many who date don’t look beyond the surface.
Instead, they quickly point to the things they have in common: "We like the same music. "
"We enjoy the same activities. "
"We agree on everything! "
However, you need to look beyond superficial traits.
You need to discern "the secret person of the heart. " (1 Peter 3:4; Ephesians 3:16)
Rather than focus on how much you agree on things, it might be more revealing to note what happens when you disagree.
For example, consider the following:
How does this person handle conflict​ by insisting on his or her way, perhaps giving in to "fits of anger " or "abusive speech "?
(Galatians 5:​19, 20; Colossians 3:8)
Or does this person show reasonableness​ a willingness to yield for the sake of peace when no issue of right or wrong is at stake?​ James 3:17.
Is the person manipulative, possessive, or jealous?
Does he or she demand to know your every move?
"I hear of dating couples who fight because one person can’t stand that the other hasn’t constantly ‘checked in,’ " says Nicole.
"I think that’s a bad sign. "​ 1 Corinthians 13:4.
How is that one viewed by others?
You may want to talk to those who have known this person for some time, such as mature ones in the congregation.
That way you will know if he or she is "well reported on. "​ Acts 16:​1, 2.
What Should I Know About Sexting? What is sexting?
What are the consequences of sexting?
What does the Bible say?
What would you do?
What is sexting?
"Sexting " is the practice of sending sexually explicit texts, photos, or videos via cell phone.
"It’s almost the normal order of operation now, " says one man.
"You text back and forth and pretty soon you’re exchanging hot photos. "
Why do people do it?
The way some teenagers see it, "having a naked picture of your significant other on your cellphone is an advertisement that you’re sexually active, " says a senior deputy prosecuting attorney quoted in The New York Times.
"It’s an electronic hickey. "
One teenager even calls it a form of "safe sex. "
After all, she says, "you can’t get pregnant from it and you can’t transmit S.T.D.’s. "
Other reasons teenagers sext include the following:
To flirt with someone they hope to be in a relationship with.
Because someone has already sent them an explicit photo and they feel pressured to ‘return the favor.’
What are the consequences of sexting?
Once you send a photo via cell phone, you no longer own it, nor can you control how it might be used​ or how it will affect your reputation.
"Mistakes and transgressions have never been so easily transmitted and archived for others to see, " says Amanda Lenhart, senior research specialist and author of a Pew Research Center report on sexting.
In some cases
Nude photos have been mass-forwarded by the recipient to entertain his friends.
Jilted boyfriends have distributed nude photos as a way to get revenge.
DID YOU KNOW?
In many cases, sexting nude photos has been considered the same as child abuse or distributing child pornography.
Some minors who have sexted have even been prosecuted as sex offenders.
What does the Bible say?
The Bible speaks favorably of sexual pleasure within marriage.
However, it takes a clear stand on sexual conduct between unmarried persons.
Consider the following Bible verses:
"Let fornication and uncleanness of every sort or greediness not even be mentioned among you, . . . neither shameful conduct nor foolish talking nor obscene jesting. "​ Ephesians 5:​3, 4.
"Deaden . . . your body members that are upon the earth as respects fornication, uncleanness, sexual appetite, hurtful desire, and covetousness. "​ Colossians 3:5.
Those verses warn not only against "fornication " (sexual relations outside of marriage) but also against such things as "uncleanness " (a broad term that refers to any type of moral impurity) and "sexual appetite " (referring not to normal romantic feelings that can be satisfied in marriage but to a passion that likely will lead to improper conduct).
Ask yourself:
How is sexting nude photos a form of "uncleanness "?
In what way does it fuel improper "sexual appetite "?
Why is the desire to view or spread nude photos "hurtful "?
The following Bible passages point to an even more compelling reason to shun sexting.
"Do your utmost to present yourself approved to God, a workman with nothing to be ashamed of. "​ 2 Timothy 2:​15.
"What sort of persons ought you to be in holy acts of conduct and deeds of godly devotion! "​ 2 Peter 3:​11.
Those verses describe the positive results of being morally upright.
When you have praiseworthy conduct, you do not need to be fearful of impulsive acts coming back to haunt you.​ Galatians 6:7.
What sort of person am I?
Do I care about the reputation of others?
Do I want to be entertained by something that hurts others?
How might sexting affect my reputation?
How might sexting damage the trust my parents have in me?
TRUE STORY
"I have a friend who kept her relationship with a boy a secret.
Then she sent a nude photo of herself to him, and he sent one of himself to her.
Not even 48 hours later, her dad decided to check her phone.
He discovered the texts, and he was devastated.
He confronted her, and she admitted to everything.
I know she’s sorry for the way she acted, but her parents were truly in shock and were so upset!
They’re not even sure if they can trust her anymore. "
Fact of life: Sexting degrades both the sender and the viewer.
"It makes me feel so disgusted and disappointed with myself, " says one teenager whose boyfriend pressured her into sexting him.
In view of the moral, ethical, and possible legal consequences of sexting, you would do well to follow the Bible’s advice:
"Flee from the desires incidental to youth. "​ 2 Timothy 2:22.
"Make my eyes pass on from seeing what is worthless. "​ Psalm 119:37.
What would you do?
Apply the Bible’s advice in a real-life situation.
Read Janet’s statement, and then choose which option you think is best.
"One time I met a boy, and we exchanged numbers.
Within a week he was asking me to send him pictures of me in a bikini. "​ Janet.
What do you think Janet should have done?
OPTION A You could reason: ‘There’s nothing wrong with that.
After all, if we went to the beach, he would see me in a bathing suit anyway.’
OPTION B You could reason: ‘I’m not sure what he’s up to.
Let me send a photo that’s less revealing and see what happens after that.’
OPTION C You could reason: ‘This boy is out for only one thing.
I’m going to delete his message.’
Option C seems best, doesn’t it?
After all, the Bible says: "Sensible people will see trouble coming and avoid it, but an unthinking person will walk right into it and regret it later. "​ Proverbs 22:3, Good News Translation.
This exercise points to an issue that is often at the root of sexting as well as other forms of misconduct: Are you selective in your choice of friends?
(Proverbs 13:20)
"Associate with people you know will not tolerate inappropriate behavior, " says a young woman named Sarah.
A young woman named Delia would agree.
"Some so-called friends are trying, not to help you keep your morals, but to break them, " she says.
"If their conduct is contrary to God’s laws, they are encouraging you to break your moral integrity.
Do you really want that? "
BE CYBER-SAVVY!
Never take or send a photo of yourself that you wouldn’t want your parents to see.
Assume that any picture you send will be seen by others, with or without your permission.
Before deleting any explicit photo you receive, report it to an adult​ perhaps a parent, a teacher, or a school counselor.
What Should I Know About Sexual Assault?​ Part 1: Precautions
What is sexual assault?
What you should know
What you can do
Though legal definitions differ from one place to another, the general term "sexual assault " can refer to unwanted sexual contact, sometimes involving physical force.
It can involve such things as child or teen sexual abuse, incest, rape, and sexual exploitation by a "helping professional "​ perhaps a doctor, a teacher, or a member of the clergy.
Some victims, whether assaulted verbally or physically, are threatened with harm if they report what happened.
According to one survey, each year in the United States alone, almost a quarter of a million people report being sexually assaulted.
Nearly half of them are between the ages of 12 and 18.
The Bible condemns sexual assault.
The Bible tells of a sex-crazed mob that sought to rape two males visiting the city of Sodom approximately 4,000 years ago​ an incident that highlighted why Jehovah destroyed that city.
(Genesis 19:4-​13)
Additionally, the Law given to Moses some 3,500 years ago prohibited incest, including the sexual assault of a family member.​ Leviticus 18:6.
Most assaults are carried out by an acquaintance.
"In two out of three rapes, the victim knows her attacker, " says the book Talking Sex With Your Kids.
"He isn’t some stranger who jumped out from behind a dumpster. "
Sexual assault happens to both genders. In the United States, about 10 percent of victims are males.
According to the Rape, Abuse & Incest National Network (RAINN), male victims "may experience a fear that the assault will make them gay " or that "they are ‘less of a man.’ "
The prevalence of sexual assault is hardly surprising.
The Bible foretold that in "the last days " many people would have "no natural affection " and would be "fierce " and "without self-control. " (2 Timothy 3:​1-3)
Those traits are clearly manifest in people who try to take advantage of others sexually.
Sexual assault is not the victim’s fault.
No one deserves to be taken advantage of sexually.
The offender alone is responsible for his or her actions.
Nevertheless, you can take measures to reduce the likelihood of sexual assault.
Be prepared.
Know in advance what you will do if someone​ even a dating partner or relative​ tries to pressure you into sexual contact.
A young woman named Erin recommends that to prepare for any type of peer-pressure situation, you could play out potential scenarios and prepare how you would react.
"It may seem hokey, " she says, "but in a real-life situation, you’ll be less likely to become a victim. "
The Bible says: "Keep strict watch that how you walk is not as unwise but as wise persons, . . . because the days are wicked. "​ Ephesians 5:​15, 16.
Ask yourself: ‘What would I do if someone touched me in a way that made me feel uneasy?’
Have an exit plan.
RAINN recommends that you "have a code word with your friends or family so that if you don’t feel comfortable you can call them and communicate your discomfort without the person you are with knowing.
Your friends or family can then come to get you or make up an excuse for you to leave. "
You can spare yourself much grief by avoiding risky situations in the first place.
The Bible says: "The shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself, but the inexperienced keep right on going and suffer the consequences. "​ Proverbs 22:3.
Ask yourself: ‘What exit plan do I have in place?’
A teenage girl calls someone for a ride home
Always have an exit plan
Set boundaries​ and stick to them.
For example, if you’re dating, you and your friend should discuss what type of conduct is and is not appropriate.
If the person you are dating thinks setting boundaries is silly, you need a different dating partner​ one who respects your values.
The Bible says: "Love . . . does not behave indecently, does not look for its own interests. "​ 1 Corinthians 13:​4, 5.
Ask yourself: ‘What are my values?
What type of conduct crosses the line of decency?’
What Should I Know About Sexual Assault?​ Part 2: Recovery
Dealing with guilt
The value of confiding in someone
"A time to heal "
Many victims of sexual abuse are deeply ashamed about what happened.
They may even feel responsible for it.
Consider Karen, now 19, who was sexually abused between the ages of 6 and 13.
"The worst thing I deal with is the guilt, " she says.
"I think to myself, ‘How could I have let the abuse go on for so long?’ "
If you feel that way about your situation, consider the following:
Children are neither physically nor emotionally prepared to have sex.
They do not know what such activity implies and are thus incapable of consenting to it in any meaningful way.
This means that child abuse is not the child’s fault.
Children tend to trust adults and to be naive about the tactics of corrupt people, which can make a child vulnerable.
"Molesters are very good ‘con men,’ and a child is no match for their clever manipulation, " says the book The Right to Innocence.
A child may experience sexual arousal while being abused.
If that happened to you, be assured that this is the body’s automatic physical response to being touched in a certain way.
It does not mean that you were capable of consenting to the abuse or that you bear any blame for it.
Suggestion: Think of a child you know who is now at the age you were when you were abused.
Ask yourself, ‘Would it be fair to hold that child responsible if he or she were abused?’
Karen reasoned on that last point when she babysat three children, one of whom was almost six years old​ the age Karen was when her abuse started.
Karen says, "I realized just how vulnerable a child that age really is​ how vulnerable I was at that age. "
Fact: The perpetrator bears responsibility for your abuse.
The Bible says: "The wickedness of the wicked one will be accounted to [that person] alone. "​ Ezekiel 18:20.
Talking to a trusted adult about the abuse can help you get relief.
The Bible says: "A true friend shows love at all times, and is a brother who is born for times of distress. "​ Proverbs 17:17.
Understandably, you might feel a measure of safety in not talking about what happened.
Perhaps silence has become like a wall that you have built to protect yourself from further hurt.
Consider, though, that the wall of silence that protects you from getting hurt might also prevent you from getting help.
A wall blocking a teenage girl from the people who can help her
The wall of silence that protects you from getting hurt might also prevent you from getting help
A young woman named Janet found that talking about her abuse was a great relief for her.
"I was molested at a very young age by someone I knew and trusted, and I held it in for years, " she says.
"But once I was able to talk to my mom about it, it was as if a huge weight had been taken off my shoulders. "
Looking back, Janet can understand why some might be reluctant to speak up.
"Abuse is such an uncomfortable topic, " she says.
"But in my case, the hurt that came from living with it was not good.
It was better for me to confront it sooner rather than later. "
Abuse may have left you with hurtful misconceptions about yourself​ for example, that you are damaged and worthless or that you exist only for the sexual gratification of others.
You now have the opportunity to recover from such lies, to benefit from "a time to heal. "
(Ecclesiastes 3:3)
What can help you in this endeavor?
Study of the Bible.
The Bible contains God’s thoughts, which are "powerful . . . for overturning strongly entrenched things "​ including false reasonings about your worth.
(2 Corinthians 10:​4, 5)
For example, read and think about the following scriptures: Isaiah 41:10; Jeremiah 31:3; Malachi 3:​16, 17; Luke 12:​6, 7; 1 John 3:​19, 20.
Prayer.
When feelings of worthlessness or guilt overwhelm you, "throw your burden on Jehovah " in prayer.
(Psalm 55:22) You are never alone!
Congregation elders.
These Christian men are trained to be "like a hiding place from the wind, a place of concealment from the rainstorm. "
(Isaiah 32:2)
They can help you to gain a balanced view of yourself and to move on with your life.
Good association.
Observe men and women who are exemplary in Christian living.
Take note of how they treat one another.
In time, you will come to realize that not all people use their influence to abuse those whom they claim to love.
A young woman named Tanya is learning that vital lesson.
From early childhood, she was treated as a sexual object by a number of men.
"The only men I was ever close to hurt me, " she says.
In time, though, Tanya has come to realize that there are men who do show genuine love.
How has she seen this?
As she associated with a husband and wife who were exemplary in Christian living, Tanya’s viewpoint changed.
"I could see from the husband’s actions that not all men are abusive, " she says.
"The husband protected his wife, and that is how God intended it to be. " ​ Ephesians 5:​28, 29.
How Can I Deal With Sexual Harassment?
What is sexual harassment?
What if I’m being sexually harassed?
What would I do?
Sexual harassment includes any unwanted sexual behavior​ including touching or even making comments of a sexual nature.
But sometimes the line can be blurred between teasing, flirting, and sexually harassing.
Do you know the difference between them?
Take our sexual harassment quiz and find out!
Sadly, sexual harassment doesn’t always stop when you graduate from school.
However, if you develop the confidence and skills you need to deal with sexual harassment now, you’ll be prepared to deal with it when you enter the workforce.
And you might even stop a harasser from hurting others!
Olivia
"You really have to stand up for yourself.
People usually don’t back off unless you give them a clear message.
Just stand up and say, ‘No!’
If that doesn’t work, tell someone! "
Tanisha
"Don’t laugh at jokes with sexual innuendo or get involved in sexually charged conversations.
If you do, or if you hang around people who enjoy a lot of attention from the opposite sex, others will assume that you want that attention too. "
What if I’m being sexually harassed?
Sexual harassment is more likely to stop if you know what it is and how to react to it!
Consider three situations and how you might deal with each one.
SITUATION:
"At work, some guys who were much older than I am kept telling me that I was beautiful and that they wished they were 30 years younger.
One of them even walked up behind me and sniffed my hair! "​ Tabitha, 20.
Tabitha could think: ‘If I just ignore it and tough it out, maybe he will stop.’
Why that probably won’t help: Experts say that when victims ignore sexual harassment, it often continues and even escalates.
Try this instead: Speak up and calmly but clearly tell your harasser that you won’t tolerate his speech or behavior.
"If anyone touches me inappropriately, " says 22-year-old Taryn, "I turn around and tell him not to touch me ever again.
That usually catches the guy off guard. "
If your harasser persists, be firm and don’t give up.
When it comes to maintaining high moral standards, the Bible’s advice is: "Stand firm, mature and confident. "​ Colossians 4:​12, The New Testament in Contemporary Language.
What if the harasser threatens to harm you?
In that case, don’t confront him.
Escape the situation as quickly as possible, and seek the help of a trusted adult.
"When I was in the sixth grade, two girls grabbed me in the hallway.
One of them was a lesbian, and she wanted me to go out with her.
Although I refused, they continued to harass me every day between classes.
Once, they even pushed me up against a wall! "​ Victoria, 18.
Victoria could have thought: ‘If I tell anyone about this, I will be labeled as weak, and maybe no one will believe me.’
Why that thinking probably would not have helped: If you hold back from telling someone, the harasser may continue and even go on to harass others.​ Ecclesiastes 8:11.
Try this instead: Get help.
Parents and teachers can give you the support you need to deal with your harasser.
But what if the people you tell don’t take your complaint seriously?
Try this: Every time you are harassed, write down the details.
Include the date, time, and location of each incident, along with what the harasser said.
Then give a copy of it to your parent or teacher.
Many people treat a written complaint more seriously than a verbal one.
"I was really afraid of this one boy who was on the rugby team.
He was almost two meters (6.5 ft) tall, and he weighed about 135 kilograms (300 lb)!
He got it into his head that he was going to ‘have me.’
He pestered me almost every day​ for a whole year.
One day, we were the only people in the classroom, and he started closing in on me.
I jumped up and ran out the door. "​ Julieta, 18.
Julieta could think: ‘That’s just the way boys are.’
Why that probably won’t help: Your harasser is unlikely to change his behavior if everyone thinks it’s acceptable.
Try this instead: Resist the temptation to laugh it off or to respond with a smile.
Rather, make sure that your reaction​ including your facial expression​ makes it clear to your harasser what you will and will not tolerate.
TRUE STORY 1:
"I don’t like being rude to people at all.
So even when guys kept harassing me, I would tell them to stop​ but I wasn’t very firm, and I often smiled as I spoke to them.
They thought I was flirting. "
Tabitha.
If you were Tabitha, how would you have dealt with those harassers?
Why?
What may cause a harasser to think that you are flirting with him or her?
TRUE STORY 2:
"It all started with just a few sleazy comments from some boys in my physical education class.
I ignored what they said for a few weeks, but it just got worse and worse.
Then the boys started to sit beside me and put their arms around me.
I pushed them away, but they kept it up.
Finally, one of the guys handed me a piece of paper with a derogatory message.
I gave it to my teacher.
The boy was suspended from school.
I realized that I should have gone to the teacher at the beginning! "
Sabina.
Why do you think that Sabina decided not to go to her teacher earlier?
Do you think that she made a good decision?
Why or why not?
TRUE STORY 3:
"My brother Greg was approached in the bathroom by another boy.
The boy got very close to Greg and said, ‘Kiss me.’
Greg said no, but the boy wouldn’t go away.
In fact, Greg had to push the boy away from him. "
Suzanne.
Do you think that Greg was a victim of sexual harassment?
Why or why not?
Why do you think some boys are reluctant to speak up when they’ve been sexually harassed by another boy?
Do you agree with the way Greg handled the situation?
What would you have done?
Sexual harassment quiz
"In middle school, boys would pull on the back of my bra and make derogatory comments​ like how much better I would feel once I had sex with them. " Coretta.
Do you think that those boys were
A Teasing?
B Flirting?
C Sexually harassing her?
"On the bus, a boy started saying nasty things to me and grabbing me.
I smacked his hand away and told him to move.
He looked at me like I was crazy. "
Candice.
What do you think that this boy was doing to Candice?
A Teasing?
B Flirting?
C Sexually harassing her?
"Last year, a boy kept telling me that he liked me and that he wanted to go out with me, even though I constantly told him no.
Sometimes, he rubbed my arm.
I told him to stop, but he wouldn’t.
Then, while I was tying my shoe, he smacked my rear end. "​ Bethany.
In your opinion, was this boy:
A Flirting?
B Teasing?
The correct answer to all three questions is C.
What makes sexual harassment different from flirting or teasing?
"Sexual harassment is one-sided, " says a girl named Eve.
"It continues even when you tell the person to stop. "
Harassment is serious.
Not only can it affect your grades and health but it can also lead to sexual violence.
What About Virginity Pledges?
What is a virginity pledge?
Do virginity pledges work?
A better approach
A virginity pledge is a written or oral promise to maintain sexual abstinence until marriage.
Virginity pledges became popular in the 1990’s when the Southern Baptist Convention in the United States launched "True Love Waits "​ a program that combined Biblical values with positive peer pressure to encourage young people to say no to sex before marriage.
A similar program, started soon afterward, featured events where attendees who took the pledge were given a silver ring to symbolize (and remind them of) their no-sex-before-marriage commitment.
The answer depends on whom you ask.
According to researchers Christine C. Kim and Robert Rector, "several studies have found that adolescent virginity pledging was associated with delayed or reduced levels of teen sexual activity. "
According to research published by the Guttmacher Institute, studies indicate that "teens who take ‘virginity pledges’ are just as likely to have sex as those who do not. "
Why the conflicting results?
Some studies compare pledgers with non-pledgers who do not share similar beliefs about sex.
Other studies compare pledgers with non-pledgers who share similar beliefs about sex.
What did the latter type of study reveal?
Dr. Janet Rosenbaum, a specialist in adolescent health issues, says that after five years, "pledgers and non-pledgers don’t differ at all in their sexual behavior. "
Virginity pledge programs have a noble goal.
The problem is, they don’t necessarily instill the values needed for follow-through.
Many who promise to remain virgins "aren’t really internalizing the pledge, " says Dr. Rosenbaum.
"Abstinence has to come from an individual conviction rather than participating in a program. "
The Bible encourages such individual conviction, not by having a person take a written or oral pledge, but by helping him to "have [his] powers of discernment trained to distinguish both right and wrong. "
(Hebrews 5:​14)
After all, virginity is not just a matter of avoiding disease and pregnancy; it is a way to show honor to the Creator of marriage.​ Matthew 5:​19; 19:​4-6.
The standards set forth in the Bible are for our good.
(Isaiah 48:17)
Indeed, all people​ regardless of their age​ can develop the strength of character to obey God’s command to "flee from sexual immorality. " (1 Corinthians 6:​18)
When they do marry, they will thus be able to enjoy intimacy fully, without the worries and regrets that are so often the aftermath of premarital sex.
Why Reject Pornography?
Do you have what it takes?
Myths and facts
How to reject pornography
If you use the Internet, expect that sooner or later you will encounter some type of pornography.
"You don’t even have to look for it anymore, " says 17-year-old Hayley.
"It looks for you. " Pornography can tempt even those who are determined to avoid it.
"I told myself that I wouldn’t let my guard down, but I did, " says Greg, 18.
"You can never say it won’t happen to you. "
Today, pornography is easier to access than ever before.
And with the advent of sexting, many teens manufacture and distribute their own pornography.
The bottom line: You face a greater challenge than your parents or grandparents did when they were your age.
The question is, Do you have what it takes to reject pornography?​ Psalm 97:10.
The answer is yes​ if you choose to.
But first you need to be convinced that pornography is bad.
Let’s consider a few myths and facts about the topic. Myths and facts
Myth: Pornography won’t hurt me.
Fact: Pornography does to your mind what smoking does to your lungs.
It pollutes you.
It degrades something that God created to be a powerful and lasting bond between two people.
(Genesis 2:​24)
In time, it can even cause you to become callous to what is right and wrong.
For example, some experts state that men who regularly view pornography are more likely to have a callous attitude toward violence against women.
1.
A man smoking a cigarette pollutes his lungs;
2.
A man viewing pornography pollutes his brain
The Bible describes some people who come to be "past all moral sense. "
(Ephesians 4:19)
Their conscience becomes insensitive to the point that they no longer feel pain over doing bad things.
Myth: Pornography can teach you about sex.
Fact: Pornography teaches you about greed.
It reduces people to mere objects and implies that they exist solely for your selfish pleasure.
Not surprisingly, one study concluded that those who habitually view pornography are less likely to experience sexual fulfillment after marriage.
The Bible tells Christians to shun "sexual immorality, uncleanness, uncontrolled sexual passion, hurtful desire, and greediness "​ all things that pornography promotes.​ Colossians 3:5.
Myth: Those who reject pornography are just prudish about sex.
Fact: People who reject pornography have an elevated view of sex.
They see that it is a gift created by God to enhance the bond between a man and a woman who are married and committed to each other.
Those with that view are likely to experience greater sexual fulfillment after marriage.
The Bible is up front about sex.
For example, it tells husbands: "Rejoice with the wife of your youth . . .
May you be captivated by her love constantly. "​ Proverbs 5:​18, 19.
What if you feel that the temptation to look at pornography is too powerful to resist?
The worksheet "How to Reject Pornography " can help you.
Be assured that you can reject the temptation to look at pornography.
You can also learn to stop viewing pornography if you have already started.
You have everything to gain by doing so.
Consider Calvin, who admits that he developed a habit of viewing pornography at about age 13.
"I knew it was wrong, " Calvin says, "but I just couldn’t overcome the temptation to look at it.
And after doing so, I would feel just horrible.
Eventually, my dad found out​ and to be honest, I was so relieved!
Finally, I was able to get the help I needed. "
Calvin has learned to reject pornography.
He says: "Getting involved with pornography was a big mistake that I’m still paying for because the images replay in my mind.
And at times I’m still tempted to think about what I could see if I were to look at things that I shouldn’t.
But then I think about how happy, how clean, and how bright my future is when I do things Jehovah’s way. "
What Should I Know About Sports?
Sports can be good for you​ or bad for you.
It all depends on what you play, how you play, and how much you play.
What are the benefits?
What are the pitfalls?
What your peers say
Playing sports can contribute to good health.
The Bible acknowledges that "physical exercise is beneficial. " (1 Timothy 4:8, footnote)
"Playing sports is a great way to stay active, " says a young man named Ryan.
"It’s a lot better than staying inside playing video games. "
Playing sports can promote teamwork and self-discipline.
The Bible uses an illustration based on a sport to teach a positive point.
It says: "The runners in a race all run, but only one receives the prize. "
It then states: "Everyone competing in a contest exercises self-control in all things. " (1 Corinthians 9:​24, 25)
The point?
It takes self-control and cooperation to play by the rules of a sport.
A teenager named Abigail agrees.
She says, "Playing sports has taught me how to cooperate and communicate with others. "
Playing sports can build friendships.
A game brings people together.
"Nearly all games involve some type of competition, " says a young man named Jordan, "but if you keep it about having fun, playing sports is a great way to connect with friends. "
What you play.
The Bible says: "Jehovah examines the righteous one as well as the wicked one; He hates anyone who loves violence. "​ Psalm 11:5.
Some sports are clearly violent.
For example, a young woman named Lauren observes: "The whole point of boxing is to beat up the other guy.
As Christians, we refrain from fighting, so why would we allow ourselves to be entertained by watching others get knocked around? "
To think about: Have you allowed yourself to justify playing or watching violent sports, thinking it will not make you commit violent acts?
If so, remember that Psalm 11:5 says that Jehovah disapproves of the person who "loves violence, " not just the person who practices it.
How you play.
The Bible says: "Do nothing out of contentiousness or out of egotism, but with humility consider others superior to you. "​ Philippians 2:3.
Of course, any activity involving opposing teams will include a degree of competition.
But a win-at-all-costs attitude will only take the fun out of the game.
"A competitive spirit can quickly overtake you, " says a teenager named Brian.
"The better you are at sports, the more you have to work on humility. "
To think about: A young man named Chris admits, "We play soccer each week, and there have been injuries. "
So ask yourself, ‘What factors can make injuries more likely to occur?
What can I do to minimize the risk of injury?’
How much you play.
The Bible says: "Make sure of the more important things. "​ Philippians 1:​10.
You need to set your priorities; spiritual things should come first.
Most games can last several hours, whether you are playing or just watching.
"I used to have conflicts with my mom over how much time I spent watching games on TV when that time could have been better spent, " says a young woman named Daria.
Someone pours a huge amount of salt on a plate of food
Putting too much emphasis on sports is like putting too much salt on your food
To think about: Do you listen when your parents offer advice about your priorities?
A young woman named Trina says: "When my siblings and I used to watch sports and neglect important duties, my mom would remind us that the players were getting paid whether we watched them or not.
‘But who’s paying you?’ she would ask us.
What she meant was this: The players already have a job.
But if we were to slack off on our homework and other responsibilities, we wouldn’t be able to support ourselves in the future.
Basically, mom was telling us that watching or playing sports should not be the most important thing in our life. "
WHAT YOUR PEERS SAY
Abigail
"Besides providing exercise, playing sports contributes to your happiness and overall well-being.
It helps you learn how to win with humility and lose with dignity. "​ Abigail.
Deven
"I love sports, but they are not as important as other things I need to do.
To me, watching a game is a reward for taking care of my responsibilities.
That gives me incentive and helps me to prioritize. "​ Deven.
What Should I Know About Alcohol?
The Bible doesn’t condemn drinking alcohol in moderation when it is legal to do so.
It does, however, prohibit drunkenness.​ Psalm 104:15; 1 Corinthians 6:​10.
But what if you feel pressured to drink in circumstances that the law or your parents do not allow?
Think past the drink
Make a resolve
Some of your peers may feel that drinking is essential to having a good time.
But what can happen after the drink?
A person in jail
Legal trouble.
Depending on where you live, if you drink alcohol when it is not legal to do so, you could be fined, be charged with a crime, lose your driver’s license, be required to perform community service, or even serve jail time.​ Romans 13:3.
A mobile device
Damaged reputation.
Alcohol lowers inhibitions.
Under its influence you could say or do things that you would later regret.
(Proverbs 23:31-​33)
In this age of social media, your actions could have a lasting impact on your reputation.
A woman is harassed
Weakened defenses.
Alcohol can leave you easy prey to physical or sexual assault.
It can also make you susceptible to the influence of others, which can lead to further risky or illegal behavior.
An empty bottle of alcohol
Addiction.
Some research indicates that the younger you start drinking, the greater your likelihood of developing a dependency.
Drinking to cope with stress, loneliness, or boredom creates a cycle that can get harder and harder to break.
A skull and crossbones
Death.
In a recent year, alcohol-impaired driving caused one fatality every 52 minutes in the United States.
During one five-year period, over 1,500 people under the age of 21 died per year in alcohol-related motor vehicle crashes.
Even if you haven’t had alcohol, you take a big risk if you accept a ride from someone who has been drinking.
You can avoid the dangerous and costly consequences of improper drinking if you decide in advance what you will do.
Bible Principle: "The shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself. "
(Proverbs 22:3)
It is unwise to drink before driving or engaging in any other activity that requires full concentration.
Resolve: ‘If I choose to drink alcohol, it will not be until it is legal and the circumstances are right.’
Bible Principle: "You are slaves of the one you obey. "
(Romans 6:​16)
If you drink just because your peers are doing it, you are allowing others to control you.
If you drink to ease boredom or to cope with stress, you are not developing the skills you need to deal with your problems.
Resolve: ‘I will not let my peers pressure me into drinking.’
Bible principle: "Do not be among those who drink too much. "
(Proverbs 23:20)
The wrong type of associates can undermine your resolve.
You put yourself at risk when you are with others who misuse alcohol.
Resolve: ‘I will not be a close associate of those who misuse alcohol.’
Jordan
"When I was in school, people tried all the time to get me to drink.
I constantly had to remind myself of the scripture at 1 Corinthians 15:33, which says: ‘Bad associations spoil useful habits.’ "​ Jordan.
Jenna
"I try to avoid any people or situations that I know will pressure me.
Thankfully, I have friends who make good choices when it comes to alcohol. "​ Jenna.
How Can I Get Along With My Teacher?
Stop and think!
Consider Rachel’s experience.
Rachel had been receiving A’s and B’s on her report cards.
Then, when she reached grade 7, things changed.
"My teacher did everything he could to make me fail his class, " says Rachel.
What was the problem?
The teacher made it obvious to both Rachel and her mother that he did not like their religion.
A boy walking over water using stepping stones
Teachers are like stepping-stones that can help you cross from ignorance to understanding, but you must do the walking
What happened?
Rachel says: "Each time it seemed clear that the teacher allowed his prejudice to affect the way he graded my work, Mom would come with me to discuss the matter with him.
Eventually, he stopped giving me a hard time. "
If you experience a similar challenge, have the courage to speak to your parents about it.
No doubt, they will be interested in speaking to the teacher and possibly the school administration to work out a solution.
Admittedly, not all tangled affairs have neat endings.
At times, you just have to endure.
(Romans 12:17, 18)
"One of my teachers had a bad attitude toward his students, " says Tanya.
"He often insulted us, calling us stupid.
At first he made me cry, but I learned not to take his insults personally.
I focused on my work and kept myself busy in his class.
As a result, he didn’t bother me much, and I was one of the few who received decent grades.
After two years, that teacher was fired. "
The bottom line: Learn how to cope with a difficult teacher, and you’ll gain a valuable life skill one that will serve you well when you have a difficult boss to deal with.
(1 Peter 2:18)
You’ll also learn to treasure good teachers when they come along.
How Can I Deal With Anxiety?
What makes you anxious?
Is anxiety always bad?
Do the following statements describe how you feel at times?
"I’m constantly thinking: ‘What if . . . ?’
‘What if we get in a car accident?’
‘What if our plane goes down?’
I’m anxious about things that a more rational person wouldn’t worry so much about. "​ Charles.
"I feel anxious all the time, as though I were a hamster on a wheel running around but never getting anywhere.
I’m working myself to death but not really accomplishing anything! "​ Anna.
"When people tell me that I’m fortunate that I’m still in school, I say to myself, ‘They have no idea how stressful school is!’ "​ Daniel.
"I’m like a pressure cooker.
I’m always worried about the next thing that will happen or the next thing I need to do. "​ Laura.
Fact of life: We live in what the Bible calls "critical times hard to deal with. " (2 Timothy 3:1)
Because of that, anxiety can affect young people as much as it affects adults.
The answer is no.
In fact, the Bible says that it is right for people to be anxious to please the ones they love.​ 1 Corinthians 7:​32-34; 2 Corinthians 11:28.
Also, let’s face it​ anxiety can be a powerful motivator.
For example, suppose you will be taking a test at school next week.
Anxiety might compel you to study this week​ and that might help you get a better grade!
A degree of anxiety can also alert you to danger.
"You might feel anxious because you know that you’re taking a wrong course of action and that you need to make changes for your conscience to be at rest, " says a teenager named Serena.​ Compare James 5:14.
Fact of life: Anxiety can work for you​ as long as it moves you to the right kind of action.
But what if anxiety traps you in a maze of negative thinking?
A man helps a teenage boy find his way out of a maze
Anxiety might make you feel as if you were trapped in a maze, but someone with a different perspective can help you find a way out
Example: "My mind races when I think about the different ways a stressful situation could turn out, " says 19-year-old Richard.
"I play the situation over and over in my mind to the point that it makes me very anxious. "
The Bible says that "a calm heart gives life to the body. "
(Proverbs 14:30)
On the other hand, anxiety can bring on a number of unpleasant physical symptoms, including headaches, dizziness, upset stomach, and heart palpitations.
What can you do if anxiety seems to be working against you rather than for you?
Question the reasonableness of your anxiety.
"Being concerned about your responsibilities is one thing; being overly anxious is another.
It reminds me of the saying, Anxiety is like a rocking chair.
It gives you something to do, but it doesn’t get you anywhere. "​ Katherine.
The Bible says: "Who of you by being anxious can add one cubit to his life span? "​ Matthew 6:27.
What this means: Unless anxiety leads you toward a solution, it will only add to your problem​ or become your problem.
Take things one day at a time.
"Think it through.
Will what you are anxious about matter tomorrow? in a month? in a year? in five years? "​ Anthony.
The Bible says: "Never be anxious about the next day, for the next day will have its own anxieties.
Each day has enough of its own troubles. "​ Matthew 6:34.
What this means: It makes little sense to take on tomorrow’s problems​ some of which may never even become a reality.
Learn to live with what you cannot change.
"The best you can do is prepare for situations to the extent possible, but accept the fact that some situations are out of your control. "​ Robert.
The Bible says: "The swift do not always win the race, . . . nor do those with knowledge always have success, because time and unexpected events overtake them all. "​ Ecclesiastes 9:11.
What this means: Sometimes you cannot change your circumstances, but you can change the way you view them.
Put your situation in perspective.
"I find that I have to focus on the big picture and not stress over the details.
I have to choose my battles and channel my energy into taking care of priorities. "​ Alexis.
The Bible says: "Make sure of the more important things. "​ Philippians 1:​10.
What this means: People who put their anxieties in perspective are less likely to be overwhelmed by them.
"When I was in the sixth grade, I would come home from school very anxious, dreading the next day.
My mother and father would just listen to me as I expressed myself.
It was so good to have them there.
I could trust them and speak freely to them.
It helped me to face the next day. "​ Marilyn.
The Bible says: "Anxiety in a man’s heart weighs it down, but a good word cheers it up. "​ Proverbs 12:25.
What this means: A parent or a friend might be able to give you practical suggestions on how to reduce your anxiety.
Pray.
"Praying​ and doing so aloud so I can hear my voice​ helps me.
It allows me to vocalize what I am anxious about instead of keeping it in my head.
It also helps me to realize that Jehovah is greater than my anxiety. "​ Laura.
The Bible says: "Throw all your anxiety on [God], because he cares for you. "​ 1 Peter 5:7.
What this means: Prayer is not a mental trick.
It is real communication with Jehovah God, who promises: "Do not be anxious, for I am your God.
I will fortify you, yes, I will help you. "​ Isaiah 41:10.
When Anxiety Is Severe
Some young people suffer from chronic anxiety.
For example, a teenager named Jenna says: "As a result of anxiety, I had a constant headache, I couldn’t focus, I would sleep for days or not sleep for days, I wouldn’t eat, or I would eat too much​ I was wired all the time.
Very small problems seemed like mountains. "
When anxiety is prolonged or excessive, it might be good for you to get a medical checkup.
That’s what Jenna did.
"After receiving treatment, I can handle things better and I have control over my anxiety, " she says.
Carissa
"When I face anxiety, I pour out my heart to Jehovah in prayer.
I can sleep well at night, knowing that the problem is in Jehovah’s hands​ and that’s the best place for me to place my life and my anxiety. "​ Carissa.
Samantha
"I always think to myself, ‘Why worry about things I can’t do anything about at the moment, or ever?’
I think about Jesus’ words at Matthew 6:27.
This helps me to rely on Jehovah and listen to his advice. "​ Samantha.
Am I Obsessed With My Appearance?
Quiz: Am I obsessed?
Why do I have a negative body image?
Should I change the way I look?
The best makeover ever!
Julia’s story
Quiz: Am I obsessed?
Which statement best describes how you feel?
I am never satisfied with how I look.
I am sometimes satisfied with how I look.
I am always satisfied with how I look.
What would you like to change most about your body?
Height
Weight
Body shape
Hair
Complexion
Muscle size
Other
Complete the following sentence.
I feel most insecure about my body . . .
when I get on the scale.
when I look in the mirror.
when I compare myself with others (friends, fashion models, movie stars).
I weigh myself . . .
daily.
weekly.
less often than once a week.
Which expression best describes your feelings?
Negative body image.
(Example: "Every time I look in the mirror, I think that I see an obese, hideous figure.
I’ve even starved myself in an effort to lose weight. "​ Serena.)
Balanced body image.
(Example: "There’s always going to be something we don’t like about our appearance, but some things we just need to accept.
It’s silly to be anxious about something we can’t change. "​ Natanya.)
The Bible tells us not to think more of ourselves "than it is necessary to think. "
(Romans 12:3)
So it’s proper​ even necessary​ to think about yourself to a degree.
That’s why, for example, you brush your teeth and give attention to your hygiene.
What, though, if you frequently get discouraged over your body image​ perhaps to the point of being obsessed about it?
If that’s the case, you might wonder . . .
‘Why do I have a negative body image?’
There could be several reasons.
These include:
Influence of the media.
"Young people are bombarded with images that make us feel that we have to be superskinny and gorgeous at all times.
As a result, if we’re anything less than perfect, we feel disgusting! "​ Kellie.
Influence of parents.
"I’ve noticed that if a mother is obsessed with her body image, often the daughter views herself the same way.
It can be the same with fathers and sons. "​ Rita.
Low self-esteem.
"People who are obsessed with their body image constantly demand positive reinforcement from others about how they look.
It gets tiring to be around that! "​ Jeanne.
Regardless of the cause, you might be asking . . .
‘Should I change the way I look?’
Consider what some of your peers say.
"You can’t always change the things you don’t like about yourself, so it’s best to accept your flaws.
If you do, other people are less likely to notice them. "​ Rori.
"Do what you can to be healthy.
If you’re healthy, you’ll look the way you’re supposed to look.
And if someone can’t appreciate you for who you are (rather than what you look like), that person isn’t your friend. "​ Olivia.
The bottom line: Do what you can to look your best.
But don’t worry about the rest.
Being overly concerned about how you look can be dangerous.
(See " Julia’s Story. ")
On the other hand, a balanced attitude will help you view yourself realistically, as a young woman named Erin learned.
"Sure, I have insecurities, " she says, "but I notice that I feel bad only when I focus on the wrong things.
Now I just exercise regularly and eat right.
The rest falls into place naturally. "
When you have a balanced view of your body image, you will feel (and even look) your best.
The Bible can help.
It encourages you to cultivate the following:
Contentment.
"It’s better to enjoy what we have than to want something else, because that makes no more sense than chasing the wind. "​ Ecclesiastes 6:9, Contemporary English Version.
A balanced approach to exercise.
"Bodily training is beneficial for a little. "​ 1 Timothy 4:8.
Inner beauty.
"Man sees what appears to the eyes; but as for Jehovah, he sees what the heart is. "​ 1 Samuel 16:7.
"Our face shows how we feel about ourself.
If a person is content, others can see that and they are automatically drawn to that person. "​ Sarah.
"Prettiness can get quick attention.
But who you are on the inside and your good qualities are what people will remember about you the most. "​ Phylicia.
See also Proverbs 11:22; Colossians 3:​10, 12; 1 Peter 3:​3, 4.
Julia’s Story
When I was 16, I had major issues with my weight. I
’ve never been overweight, but I’m not naturally skinny either.
I was curvy.
I thought that just maybe, if I were slender, guys would like me.
So I almost starved myself in order to achieve the body I wanted.
I got skinny, but I ended up with health problems as a result.
These were addressed, but the emotional effects are still there.
To this day, I have issues with food.
I’ve slowly come to terms with my body.
I eat right and exercise.
But when I’m upset with myself about something, my automatic reaction is to punish myself by not eating.
If I could, I would tell other young people to remember that everyone has a different perspective.
No matter what you look like, there will always be some people who think you’re attractive and others who don’t.
The important thing is that you’re healthy.
That’s what matters to those who truly care about you.
How Can I Have a Balanced Diet?
You probably know that an unbalanced diet can damage your health.
Unhealthy youths often become unhealthy adults, so it’s good for you to develop healthy eating habits now.
What is a balanced diet?
How can I stick to a balanced diet?
The Bible tells us to be "moderate in habits, " and that includes our eating habits.
(1 Timothy 3:11) With this principle in mind, it’s good to know that . . .
A balanced diet includes all food groups.
The five food groups include dairy products, proteins, fruits, vegetables, and grains.
Some people eliminate one or more food groups from their diet, thinking that doing so will help them lose weight.
But that approach can deprive your body of the very nutrients it needs.
Try this: Do research or consult your doctor to learn about the benefits of the various substances found in foods.
For example:
Carbohydrates can give you energy. Proteins can help your body fight infection and also build and repair tissues.
Certain fats in the right amount can lower your risk of heart disease and keep you feeling your best.
"I try to have balanced meals from all food groups.
Also, I don’t think it’s wrong occasionally to have a candy bar or eat fast food.
But that shouldn’t be all a person’s diet consists of.
Moderation is always a good rule to follow. "
Brenda.
A young man tipping over in a chair with three legs
A diet that is missing vital nutrients is like a chair that is missing a leg
A balanced diet avoids extremes.
These might include not eating enough, binge eating, or denying yourself an occasional treat.
Try this: For a month, keep track of your eating habits.
How often do you go to one of the extremes described above?
What adjustments can you make to have a balanced diet?
"I had extremes of very-high-calorie binge days and very-low-calorie strict days.
Finally, I decided to stop counting calories, to be careful not to overeat, and to stop eating when I was full.
It took time, but now I have a balanced diet. "
Hailey.
Think ahead.
The Bible says: "The plans of the diligent surely lead to success. "
(Proverbs 21:5)
To succeed in having healthy eating habits takes forethought.
"It takes planning to eat healthier, and oftentimes healthy food has to be prepared at home.
But it’s worth the effort in the long run, and it can also save you money. "
Thomas.
Replace unhealthy choices.
The Bible says: "Safeguard practical wisdom. "
(Proverbs 3:21)
Practical wisdom will help you to get creative and find methods that work best for you.
"I started to make healthy swaps, one per day.
For example, instead of eating a candy bar, I ate an apple.
Before long I was making many healthy swaps each day! "
Kia.
Have reasonable expectations.
The Bible says: "Eat your food with rejoicing. "
(Ecclesiastes 9:7)
Having a balanced diet shouldn’t take the joy out of eating, nor does it require that you obsess about every morsel of food you take into your body.
Even if you need to lose weight, remember that your goal is to be healthy.
Be reasonable about what you expect of yourself.
"I recently lost 30 pounds, and through this journey I never starved myself, cut out a food group, or beat myself up for eating a dessert.
I accepted the fact that this wasn’t going to be a quick process and that it truly is a lifestyle change. "
Melanie.
Delayna
"When I’m out and let myself go hungry, I tend to make poor food choices.
That’s why I like to pack my lunch or take a snack with me.
That way, I have a lot more control over what I eat. "
Delayna.
Andrew
"You can get discouraged when you see others who seem to eat whatever they want yet suffer no ill effects.
Don’t compare yourself to them.
Find out what works for you and focus on that. "
Andrew.
Review: How can I have a balanced diet?
Make your own meals instead of relying on whatever is available when you are outside the home.
Keep healthy snacks available instead of just grabbing a bag of potato chips with a soft drink.
Don’t compare yourself to other people.
What if I’m Being Bullied?
What is bullying?
Why do people bully others?
Who is most likely to be a target?
What can you do if you’re bullied?
Also, read tips from your peers and a teacher’s comments about bullying, and take our bullying quiz.
Bullying is no trivial matter.
A British study found that more than 40 percent of the youth suicides reported in the national media appeared to involve bullying as a contributing factor.
Bullying includes more than physical assaults.
It can also involve the following.
Verbal attacks.
"Girls can be brutal with their words, " says 20-​year-old Celine.
"I’ll never forget the names they called me or the things they said.
They made me feel worthless, unwanted, and good-for-nothing.
I’d rather have been given a black eye. "
Social isolation.
"My schoolmates started to avoid me, " says 18-​year-​old Haley.
"They would make it seem that there was no room at the lunch table so I couldn’t sit with them.
For the whole year, I cried and ate alone. "
Cyberbullying.
"With just a few keystrokes on a computer, " says 14-​year-​old Daniel, "you can ruin someone’s reputation​ or even his life.
It sounds like an overstatement, but it can happen! "
Cyberbullying also includes sending harmful photos or text messages using a cell phone.
These are some common reasons.
They themselves have been bullied.
"I was so sick and tired of being mistreated by my peers that I began to bully others just to fit in, " admits a young man named Antonio.
"Later I looked back and realized how wrong it was to do that! "
They have poor role models.
"Many times young bullies treat other people . . . the way they see their parents, older brothers and sisters, or other family members treat others, " writes Jay McGraw in his book Life Strategies for Dealing With Bullies.
They act as if they are superior​ and yet they’re insecure.
"Kids who bully have an air of superiority that is often a mask to cover up deep hurt and a feeling of inadequacy, " notes Barbara Coloroso in her book The Bully, the Bullied, and the Bystander.
Loners.
Some young people who lack social skills isolate themselves from others and become easy marks for bullies.
Youths who are perceived as being different.
Some youths are targeted by bullies because of their appearance, race, or religion or even because they have a disability​ anything the bully can pick on.
Youths who lack self-confidence.
Bullies can detect those who think negatively of themselves.
These are often the easiest targets, since they’re not likely to fight back.
Don’t react.
"Bullies want to know that they’ve succeeded in making you feel bad about yourself, " says a young woman named Kylie.
"If you don’t react, they lose interest. "
The Bible says: "He that is wise keeps it calm to the last. "​ Proverbs 29:11.
Don’t retaliate.
Revenge will add to the problem, not solve it.
The Bible says: "Return evil for evil to no one. "​ Romans 12:17; Proverbs 24:19.
Don’t walk into trouble.
To the extent possible, avoid people and situations where bullying may occur.​ Proverbs 22:3.
Try an unexpected response.
The Bible says: "An answer, when mild, turns away rage. "​ Proverbs 15:1.
Use humor.
For example, if a bully asserts that you’re overweight, you could simply shrug your shoulders and say, "I guess I could lose a few pounds! "
Walk away.
"Silence shows that you are mature and that you are stronger than the person harassing you, " says 19-year-old Nora.
"It demonstrates self-control​ something the bully doesn’t have. "
Work on your self-confidence.
"Bullies notice when you aren’t relaxed, " says a girl named Rita, "and they might use that to destroy whatever self-​confidence you have. "
Tell someone.
According to one survey, more than half of all victims who are bullied online don’t report what’s going on, possibly because of shame (especially for boys) or fear of retaliation.
But remember, bullies thrive on secrecy.
Speaking up can be the first step to ending the nightmare.
Tips from your peers
"Avoid places or situations that will make you an easy target for a bully.
Remember, too, that bullies are going through their own issues.
When you know that, it takes some of the sting out of their words. "​ Antonio.
"Be confident in yourself.
Don’t be afraid to stand up for what you believe.
Many bullies back off when they see that you aren’t giving them any power over you and that you aren’t afraid. "​ Jessica.
A teacher’s comments
"Bullying is a serious problem.
Where I taught school, fights broke out right inside the classroom​ even among third graders!
Some kids thrive on bullying because it makes them feel that they’re popular and in control.
"Often, victims hesitate to report bullying because they’re scared that the bully will retaliate or that their classmates will view them as a snitch.
They may also be skeptical about whether anything will be done about the bullying.
Still, I would urge anyone who is being bullied to speak up.
It’s the right thing to do, and it can prevent someone else from being bullied. "​ Jenilee, a former schoolteacher in the United States.
Bullying quiz
True or False
Bullying has been around for thousands of years.
Bullying is just harmless teasing.
It’s not that serious. The best way to stop a bully is to fight back.
If you’re being bullied, it’s your fault.
Some people who are bullied become bullies.
If you witness bullying, it’s best to ignore it.
Beneath the boastful talk, bullies are often insecure.
Bullies can change.
ANSWERS
True.
For example, the Bible tells of the Nephilim​ a group whose name means "Those Who Cause Others to Fall Down. "​ Genesis 6:4.
False.
Bullying can be a life-and-death issue.
Sadly, some who have been relentlessly bullied commit suicide.
Bullies are often physically stronger than their victims, making attempts at retaliation futile.
No one deserves to be bullied!
The bully is fully responsible for his or her actions.
Sadly, some take their own frustration out on others by treating them the way that they have been treated.
There’s no such thing as an innocent bystander.
If you see bullying and don’t say anything, you may become part of the problem rather than part of the solution.
Although some bullies have a big ego, many are insecure and put others down to make themselves feel better.
With intervention and help, bullies can change their thinking​ and their behavior.​ Ephesians 4:​23, 24.
How Can I Stop Being So Sad?
"When everyone else falls apart, I’m there to fix their problems and make them feel better.
But then​ and this is the part that few people see I go home to my room and cry. "​ Kellie.
"When I’m down, I isolate myself.
If I get invited somewhere, I come up with an excuse not to go.
I do a good job at hiding my sadness from my family.
They think I’m fine. "​ Rick.
Have your thoughts ever been similar to those of Kellie or Rick?
If so, don’t hastily conclude that there’s something wrong with you.
The fact is, everyone gets sad now and then.
Even faithful men and women mentioned in the Bible did.​ 1 Samuel 1:​6-8; Psalm 35:14.
In some cases, you may know why you are sad; in other cases, you may not.
"You don’t have to be in a horrible situation to feel sad, " says 19-year-old Anna.
"It can come on at any time, even if your life is trouble free.
It’s weird, but it happens! "
Regardless of the cause​ or even if there doesn’t seem to be one what can you do when sadness holds you in its grip?
Try the following:
Talk about it.
In the midst of his turmoil, Job said: "I will speak in the bitterness of my soul! "​ Job 10:1.
Kellie: The relief I feel after talking to someone is amazing.
Finally, someone knows what I’m going through.
They can lower the rope and pull me out of the pit​ saved at last!
Write about it.
When sadness clouds your outlook on life, you might want to try putting your thoughts on paper.
In his inspired psalms, David sometimes expressed deep sadness.
(Psalm 6:6) Writing about such feelings can help you to "safeguard practical wisdom and thinking ability. "​ Proverbs 3:​21.
Heather: Writing helps me to organize the mental clutter that accumulates from sadness.
When you can express your feelings and sort them out, the sadness is less overwhelming.
The Bible says that if you pray about your concerns, ‘the peace of God that excels all thought will guard your heart and your mental powers.’​ Philippians 4:​6, 7.
Esther: I was trying to figure out why I felt so down, and I couldn’t.
I asked Jehovah to help me to be happy.
I was sick of being sad when I had no reason to be.
I finally broke the cycle.
Never underestimate the power of prayer!
With assistance and effort, you can get out of a deep pit of sadness
Suggestion: Use Psalm 139:23, 24 as a pattern for your own prayer to Jehovah.
Pour out your heart, and ask him to help you identify the root of your sadness.
In addition to the suggestions mentioned earlier, you have a valuable resource in God’s Word, the Bible.
Filling your mind with upbuilding thoughts that can be gleaned from Bible accounts can have a positive effect on your feelings.​ Psalm 1:​1-3.
When sadness won’t go away
"On some mornings, " says Ryan, "I feel that it would be easier just to stay in bed and avoid having to get up and face another pointless day. "
Ryan suffers from clinical depression, and he’s not alone.
Studies suggest that about 1 in 4 youths suffers from some type of major or minor depression before reaching adulthood.
How can you find out if you suffer from depression?
Some symptoms include a pronounced change in mood and behavior, social isolation, diminished interest in almost all activities, a significant change in eating habits and sleeping patterns, and intense feelings of worthlessness or unwarranted guilt.
Of course, nearly everyone has one or more of those symptoms at some time or another.
But if symptoms persist for more than a couple of weeks, why not talk to your parents about getting a checkup?
A physician can help determine if your sadness has a medical cause.
If you do suffer from clinical depression, it is nothing to be ashamed of.
With treatment, many sufferers have begun to feel better​ perhaps the best they have felt in a long time.
Whether your sadness is caused by depression or not, remember the comforting words of Psalm 34:18: "Jehovah is near to those that are broken at heart; and those who are crushed in spirit he saves. "
How Can I Control My Anger?
Quiz
Why it matters
How often do you get angry?
almost never
occasionally
every day
How bad does your anger get?
lukewarm
hot boiling
With whom are you most likely to get angry?
a parent
a sibling
a friend
If you see the need to control your anger, this article will help you!
First, consider some reasons why it’s important to stay calm when you’re provoked.
Your well-being.
Proverbs 14:30 says: "A calm heart gives life to the body. "
In contrast, the Journal of Medicine and Life says that "anger can have a direct impact upon cardiovascular diseases. "
Your friends.
The Bible says: "Do not keep company with a hot-tempered man or get involved with one disposed to rage. "
(Proverbs 22:24) So if you have anger issues, don’t be surprised if people avoid you.
"If you don’t learn to control your temper, " says a young woman named Jasmine, "you will lose out on rewarding friendships. "
Your reputation.
"If you lose your temper, " says 17-year-old Ethan, "it will become known to others and it will shape their opinion of you. "
Ask yourself, ‘How do I want to be known​ as a coolheaded peacemaker or as a ticking time bomb?’
The Bible says: "The one who is slow to anger has great discernment, but the impatient one displays his foolishness. "​ Proverbs 14:29.
A teenage boy’s friends back away as he loses his temper
No one wants to be around someone with an explosive temper
Consider the following scriptures and comments, and ask yourself the accompanying questions.
Proverbs 29:22: "A man prone to anger stirs up strife; anyone disposed to rage commits many transgressions. "
"In my early teen years, I had the hardest time controlling my temper.
My relatives on my dad’s side have the same problem.
We call it the family gene.
Our tempers are very hard to control! "​ Kerri.
Am I prone to anger?
If I accept credit for my good qualities, is it reasonable to blame genetics for this bad quality?
Proverbs 15:1: "A mild answer turns away rage, but a harsh word stirs up anger. "
"The key is to learn to control your emotions.
If you cultivate a mild personality and focus on the positive, losing your temper won’t be an option​ or an issue. "​ Daryl.
When provoked, why is my first response crucial?
Proverbs 26:20: "Where there is no wood, the fire goes out. "
"When I respond kindly, it usually calms the other person down and we’re both able to communicate without our emotions spiraling out of control. "​ Jasmine.
How might my speech or actions only add fuel to the fire?
Proverbs 22:3: "The shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself, but the inexperienced keep right on going and suffer the consequences. "
"Sometimes I just need to walk away and give myself time to think about what happened, and then I can deal with it later when I’m calm. "​ Gary.
When might it be best to walk away from a tense situation without giving the impression that you are turning your back on the other person?
James 3:2: "We all stumble many times. "
"We should regret our mistakes, but we should also learn from them.
We need to get right back up when we fall and resolve to do better next time. "​ Kerri.
Tip: Set a goal.
Resolve that you will remain coolheaded for a certain period of time​ perhaps a month.
Keep a diary and track your progress.
Alyssa
"I used to think that those who gave in without getting angry were weak; now I see that they may have been showing humility​ one of the most important qualities we can possess.
Learning to control my temper isn’t easy, but it’s worth it! "​ Alyssa.
Erik
"Taking a few deep breaths allows me time to think before I react in a way I’ll later regret.
Getting angry never really solves anything.
In fact, it can make things worse. "​ Erik.
Creation or Evolution?​ Part 1: Why Believe in God?
Creation or evolution?
Why do I believe in God?
Explaining my belief
Do you believe that God created all things?
If so, you’re not alone; many young people (and adults) share your view.
But others say that life and the universe evolved​ without the help of a "Supreme Being. "
People on both sides of the debate are often quick to state what they believe without really knowing why they believe it.
Some people believe in creation simply because that’s what they’ve been taught at church.
Many people believe in evolution simply because that’s what they’ve been taught at school.
This series of articles will help you to reinforce and explain your belief in creation.
First, though, you need to ask yourself an even more basic question:
Why is that question important?
Because the Bible encourages you to use your mind, "your power of reason. "
(Romans 12:1) That means your belief in God should not be based merely on
emotion (I just feel that there must be a higher power)
the influence of others (I live in a religious community)
pressure (My parents raised me to believe in God​ or else)
Instead, you should be personally convinced that God exists and should have sound reasons for your belief.
So, what convinces you that God exists?
The worksheet "Why Do I Believe in God? " will build your conviction.
You might also find it helpful to consider how other young people have answered that question.
"When I’m in class listening to the teacher explain how our bodies function, there’s no doubt in my mind that God exists.
Each part of the body has its own function, down to the smallest detail, and these functions are often carried out without our awareness.
The human body truly is mind-boggling! "​ Teresa.
"When I see a skyscraper, a cruise ship, or a car, I ask myself, ‘Who built this?’
It takes intelligent people to build a car, for example, because so many small components have to work just right for the whole thing to function.
And if cars have to be designed by someone, then so do we humans. "​ Richard.
"When you realize that it’s taken the most intelligent human minds hundreds of years to understand even the smallest fraction of the universe, then thinking that it took no intelligence to bring that universe into existence seems completely unreasonable! "​ Karen.
"The more I studied science, the less credible evolution seemed.
For example, I thought about the mathematical precision in nature and the uniqueness of humans, including our need to know who we are, where we came from, and where we are going.
Evolution aims to explain all these things in terms associated with animals, but it has never been able to explain why humans are unique.
To me, it takes more ‘faith’ to believe in evolution than to believe in a Creator. "​ Anthony.
What if classmates ridicule you for believing in something you can’t see?
What if they say that science has "proved " evolution?
First, be confident in what you believe.
Do not be intimidated or ashamed.
(Romans 1:​16) After all, remember:
You are not alone; many people still believe in God.
That includes highly intelligent, professional people.
For example, there are scientists who believe there is a God.
When people say that they don’t believe in God, sometimes what they really mean is that they don’t understand God.
Rather than offer evidence to support their view, they raise questions such as, "If God exists, why does he allow suffering? "
In effect, they turn an intellectual issue into an emotional one.
Humans have a "spiritual need. "
(Matthew 5:3) This includes a need to believe in God.
So if someone says there is no God, that person​ not you​ has the responsibility to explain how he or she could reach such a conclusion.​ Romans 1:​18-​20.
Belief in God is entirely reasonable.
It conforms to the proven fact that life cannot come into existence by itself.
No evidence exists to support the idea that life could spontaneously come from nonliving matter.
What, then, could you say if someone questions your belief in God?
Consider a few possibilities.
If someone says: "Only uneducated people believe in God. "
You could respond: "Do you really accept that stereotype?
I don’t.
In fact, in a survey in which more than 1,600 science professors from various elite universities took part, a third did not claim to be atheist or agnostic.
Would you call those professors unintelligent just because they believe in God? "
If someone says: "If God exists, why is there so much suffering in the world? "
You could respond: "Perhaps what you mean is that you don’t understand how God acts​ or in this case, doesn’t seem to act.
Is that right?
[Allow for response.]
I’ve found a satisfying answer to the question about why there is so much suffering.
But understanding it takes an examination of several Bible teachings.
Would you be interested in learning more? "
The next article in this series will discuss why the theory of evolution does not provide a satisfactory explanation for our existence.
Creation or Evolution?​ Part 2: Why Question Evolution?
Alex is confused.
He has always believed in God and in creation.
But today his biology teacher forcefully claimed that evolution is a fact, that it is based on credible scientific research.
Alex doesn’t want to appear to be foolish.
‘After all,’ he says to himself, ‘if scientists have proved evolution to be true, who am I to question them?’
Can you identify with this scenario?
Perhaps for all your life, you’ve believed what the Bible says: "God created the heavens and the earth. "
(Genesis 1:1) Yet, recently people have been trying to convince you that creation is a myth and that evolution is a fact.
Should you believe them?
Why question evolution?
Two reasons to question evolution
Questions to consider
Scientists don’t agree on evolution.
Despite decades of research, scientists have yet to come up with an explanation for evolution that they all can agree on.
To think about: If scientists can’t agree on evolution​ and they’re supposed to be the experts​ are you wrong to question the theory?​ Psalm 10:4.
It matters what you believe.
"If life came about by accident, then our lives​ and all the things in our universe​ are meaningless, " says a boy named Zachary.
He has a point.
After all, if evolution were true, life would not seem to have any lasting purpose.
(1 Corinthians 15:32) On the other hand, if creation is true, we can find satisfying answers to questions about the purpose of life and what the future holds.​ Jeremiah 29:11.
To think about: How would knowing the truth about evolution and creation make a difference in your life?​ Hebrews 11:1.
CLAIM: ‘Everything in the universe came as a result of a random big bang.’
Who or what caused the big bang?
Which makes more sense​ that everything came from nothing or that everything came from something or someone?
CLAIM: ‘Humans evolved from animals.’
If humans evolved from animals​ from apes, for example​ why is there such a huge gap between the intellectual abilities of humans and those of apes?
Why are even the most "basic " forms of life so incredibly complex?
CLAIM: ‘Evolution is a proven fact.’
Has the person making this claim investigated the evidence for himself?
How many people believe in evolution simply because they have been told that all intelligent people believe in it?
Gwen
"Imagine that someone told you that there was an explosion at a printing plant and that the ink spattered onto the walls and ceilings and formed an unabridged dictionary.
Would you believe it?
How much more unbelievable is it that everything in the orderly universe came about as a result of a random big bang? "
Jessica
"Humans have qualities far beyond what is necessary for mere survival.
In fact, we care for sick people and help those who are less fortunate.
Why would we do that if evolution​ with its ‘survival of the fittest’ motto​ were true? "
Julia
"If you were walking through the forest and discovered a beautiful log cabin, would you think: ‘How fascinating!
The trees must have fallen in just the right way to make this house.’
Of course not!
It’s just not reasonable.
So why should we believe that everything in the universe just happened to come about? "
Creation or Evolution?​ Part 3: Why Believe in Creation?
"If you believe in creation, people might think that you’re stupid, that you’re clinging to childish beliefs taught to you by your parents, or that you’ve been brainwashed by religion. "​ Jeanette.
Do you feel the same way Jeanette does?
If so, you may find yourself doubting your belief in creation.
After all, no one likes to be viewed as ignorant.
What can help?
Objections to belief
Think about your beliefs
Tools to help you examine the evidence
If you believe in creation, people will think you’re against science.
"My teacher said that believing in creation is something people do when they’re too lazy to come up with an explanation for how the world works. "​ Maria.
What you should know: Those who make such claims are not aware of the facts.
Famous scientists such as Galileo and Isaac Newton believed in a Creator.
Their belief did not conflict with their love for science.
Likewise, some scientists today find no conflict between science and belief in creation.
Try this: Type the expression (including quotation marks) "explains her faith " or "explains his faith " in the search box of Watchtower ONLINE LIBRARY for examples of those in the field of medicine and science who accept creation.
Note what helped them to reach that conclusion.
The bottom line: Belief in creation doesn’t make you antiscience.
In fact, learning more about the natural world can strengthen your belief in creation.​ Romans 1:​20.
If you believe in the Bible’s account of creation, people will think you’re a religious fanatic.
"A lot of people consider belief in creation to be a joke.
They feel that the Genesis account is just a story. "​ Jasmine.
What you should know: People often have misconceptions about the Bible’s account of creation.
For example, some creationists claim that the earth was recently created or that life was created in six 24-hour days.
The Bible does not support either viewpoint.
Genesis 1:1 simply states: "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. "
This does not conflict with scientific evidence that the earth is billions of years old.
The word "day " as used in Genesis can refer to long periods of time.
In fact, at Genesis 2:4, the word "day " is used to describe all six days of creation.
The bottom line: The Bible’s account of creation is in harmony with scientific facts.
Belief in creation does not require "blind faith. "
Rather, it rests on sound reasoning.
Consider this:
Everything you experience in life teaches you that where there is design, there is a designer.
When you see a camera, a plane, or a house, you rightly conclude that someone designed it.
Why should you abandon that logic when you consider the human eye, a bird in the sky, or our planet Earth?
To think about: Engineers often copy traits that they observe in nature so that they can improve their own inventions, and they rightly want others to acknowledge their work.
Is it logical to recognize the human inventor and his work and yet fail to acknowledge the Creator and His far superior designs?
An airplane and a bird in flight
Is it reasonable to think that an airplane was designed but a bird was not?
You can strengthen your conviction in creation by inspecting the evidence found in nature.
Try this: Type the phrase (including quotation marks) "was it designed " in the search box of Watchtower ONLINE LIBRARY.
Select some titles that interest you from the Awake! series "Was It Designed? "
For each article, identify what is remarkable about the aspect of nature discussed.
How does it convince you that there is a Designer?
Dig deeper: Use the following brochures to explore the evidence for creation in more detail.
Was Life Created?
The earth is perfectly located and equipped to support life.​ See pages 4-​10.
Examples of design are found in nature.​ See pages 11-​17.
The Bible’s account of creation in Genesis is in harmony with science.​ See pages 24-​28.
The Origin of Life​ Five Questions Worth Asking
Life could not have begun spontaneously from nonliving matter.​ See pages 4-7.
Living organisms are too complex to have developed through undirected, spontaneous events.​ See pages 8-​12.
The information capacity within the genetic code surpasses modern technology.​ See pages 13-​21.
All life did not descend from a common ancestor.
The fossil record supports the sudden appearance of major animal groups, not their gradual development.​ See pages 22-​29.
"The natural world convinces me most about God’s existence, from the animals here on earth to the universe and the order that exists in it. "​ Thomas.
Hannah
"When I read in science class about all the intricacies of plants, animals, and the human body, it just blew my mind!
I have no doubt that this is the work of a Creator.
I think it takes ‘blind faith’ to believe in evolution, not creation. "​ Hannah.
Talia
"I love to read the feature ‘Was it Designed?’ in the ‘Awake!’ magazine.
It proves to me that evolution cannot be true.
It’s crazy to think that something as beautiful as a butterfly or a hummingbird can come about by accident. "​ Talia.
Creation or Evolution?​ Part 4: How Can I Explain My Belief in Creation?
You believe in creation, but you’re reluctant to say so openly at school.
Maybe your textbooks endorse evolution and you worry that teachers and classmates might make fun of you.
How can you speak up confidently and explain your belief in creation?
You can do it!
Be ready
Tools to help you explain your belief
What your peers say
You might think: ‘I’m not smart enough to discuss science and debate evolution.’
That’s how Danielle felt at one time.
"I hated feeling that I had to contradict my teacher and my classmates, " she says.
Diana agrees, "I got confused when they argued using scientific terms. "
However, your goal is not to win arguments.
And the good news is that you don’t need to be a genius at science to explain why you find creation to be a rational explanation for the natural world.
Tip: Use the simple logic found in the Bible at Hebrews 3:4: "Every house is constructed by someone, but the one who constructed all things is God. "
A young woman named Carol reasons on the principle of Hebrews 3:4 this way: "Imagine that you’re walking through a dense forest.
Every evidence of a human being is miles away.
You then look down and see a toothpick on the ground.
What is your conclusion?
Most people would say, ‘Someone else has been here.’
If something as small and insignificant as a toothpick is evidence of intelligent life, how much more so is the universe and all that’s in it! "
If someone says: "If creation is true, then who created the Creator? "
You could respond: "Just because we don’t understand everything about the Creator doesn’t mean he doesn’t exist.
For example, you may not know the history of the person who designed your cell phone, but you still believe it was designed by somebody, right?
There’s so much we can know about the Creator.
If you’re curious, I’d be happy to share what I’ve learned about him. "
The Bible says that you should be "ready to make a defense before everyone who demands of you a reason for the hope you have, but doing so with a mild temper and deep respect. " (1 Peter 3:​15) Therefore, give attention to two factors​ what you say and how you say it.
What you say.
Your love of God is important and can motivate you to speak up.
But just telling others how much you love God may not be enough to convince them that God created all things.
It might be best to use examples from nature to show why it is rational to believe in creation.
How you say it.
Be confident, but don’t be rude or condescending.
People are likely to consider your viewpoint if you speak respectfully about their beliefs and acknowledge their right to come to their own conclusions.
"I think it’s important never to come across as insulting or as a know-it-all.
It would be counterproductive to speak in a condescending tone. "​ Elaine.
A teenage girl walking in the rain
Being prepared to defend your beliefs is like being prepared for a change in the weather
"If we aren’t prepared, " says a teenager named Alicia, "we’ll just want to stay quiet to avoid embarrassment. "
As Alicia points out, preparation is vital to success.
Jenna states, "I feel much more comfortable discussing creation when I have a simple yet well-thought-out example to back up my belief. "
Where can you find such examples?
Many young people have had success using the following material:
Was Life Created?
The Origin of Life​ Five Questions Worth Asking
The Wonders of Creation Reveal God’s Glory (video)
The series "Was It Designed? " in the Awake! magazine.
(Type the phrase [including quotation marks] "was it designed " in the search box of Watchtower ONLINE LIBRARY.)
Use Watchtower ONLINE LIBRARY for additional research.
You might also find it helpful to review the previous articles in this series, "Creation or Evolution? "
Part 1: Why Believe in God?
Part 2: Why Question Evolution?
Part 3: Why Believe in Creation?
Tip: Choose examples that convince you.
They will be easier for you to remember, and you will be able to speak about them with conviction.
Try practicing how you will explain your belief.
Brittany
"If we evolved, then why do we have qualities such as compassion and love?
Those qualities make you think of others rather than yourself.
It doesn’t make sense to me to say that those qualities evolved. "​ Brittany.
Breanna
"When I took a biology course, I learned about anatomy and the functions of our cells.
Even though the course supported evolution, what I learned made it clear to me that we are the product of intelligent design. "​ Breanna.
Is Cursing Really That Bad?
"I’m so used to hearing profanity that it doesn’t faze me anymore.
It seems normal. "​ Christopher, 17.
"When I was younger, I cursed a lot.
It was a very easy habit to pick up and a very difficult one to break. "​ Rebecca, 19.
How are you affected when you hear others curse?
I don’t even notice it​ it sounds normal to me.
It bothers me somewhat​ but I just accept it.
I find it offensive​ I just can’t get used to it.
How often do you curse?
Never
Occasionally
Frequently
In your opinion, how important is the issue of foul language?
Trivial
Serious
Do you view cursing as a serious matter?
‘Not really,’ you might say.
‘After all, there are bigger problems in the world to worry about.
Besides, everybody curses!’
Is that really true?
Believe it or not, there are many people who refrain from using bad language.
And they know a few things that others don’t know.
Cursing isn’t just about words.
Your speech reveals what is going on inside you.
Using foul language, then, could indicate that you are insensitive to the feelings of others.
Is that the kind of person you really are?
The Bible says: "Whatever comes out of the mouth comes from the heart. "​ Matthew 15:18.
A group of teenagers shrink back in disgust as a teenage boy curses
Profanity is verbal pollution.
Why subject others​ or yourself​ to it?
Cursing can cause others to think negatively of you.
The book Cuss Control says: "The way we speak can determine who our friends will be, the amount of respect we will get from our families and coworkers, the quality of our relationships, how influential we will be, whether we get the job or the promotion, and how strangers respond to us. "
It also says: "Ask yourself if your relationships could, perchance, be even better if you didn’t swear. "
The Bible says: "Put away . . . abusive speech. "​ Ephesians 4:31.
Swearing doesn’t make you sound as cool as you might think. In his book How Rude!
Dr. Alex Packer states: "People who swear all the time are tiresome to listen to. "
He adds that a profanity-filled vocabulary "doesn’t allow for the expression of much insight, wit, intelligence, or empathy.
If your speech is lazy, vague, and unimaginative, your mind is sure to follow. "
The Bible says: "Let a rotten word not come out of your mouth. "​ Ephesians 4:​29.
Set a goal.
Why not try to eliminate bad language in one month or less?
You could track your progress on a chart or a calendar.
To stick to your resolve, however, you may need to take further steps.
Avoid entertainment that floods your brain with bad language.
The Bible says: "Bad associations corrupt good morals. " (1 Corinthians 15:33, footnote) "Associations " include not only people but entertainment​ the movies you watch, the video games you play, and the music you listen to.
Kenneth, 17, says: "It’s easy to sing along with a song you like and totally ignore the fact that it has cursing​ just because it has a good beat. "
Show yourself to be mature.
Some people use profanity because they think it makes them sound like an adult.
Really, the opposite is true.
Mature people "have their powers of discernment trained to distinguish both right and wrong, " says the Bible.
(Hebrews 5:​14) They don’t lower their standards just to "impress " others.
Really, bad language only pollutes the mind (and the air) with indecent thoughts.
There are too many of those in the world already!
"Don’t add to the slop, " recommends Cuss Control. "Do your part to clean up the verbal environment.
You will feel better about yourself, and other people will feel better about you, too. "
Jared
"Bad language doesn’t represent you well.
If you can’t form sentences without using profanity, it just shows others that you have a limited vocabulary. "​ Jared.
Jennifer
"People are faced with a choice as to how they will speak.
It’s not always easy, but we have to think before we talk.
Cursing is a habit that can be stopped. "​ Jennifer.
Why Do I Cut Myself?
What is cutting?
If you have this problem, how can you stop?
Interview
Questions for reflection
My scripture journal
What is cutting?
Cutting is the practice of compulsively harming oneself with a sharp object.
It’s just one form of self-injury.
Others include burning, bruising, or hitting oneself.
This article is about cutting, but the principles discussed apply to all forms of self-injury.
Test your knowledge: True or False.
Only girls cut themselves.
What Is the Sign of "the Last Days, " or "End Times "?
The Bible’s answer
The Bible describes events and conditions that would mark "the conclusion of the [current] system of things, " or "the end of the world. "
(Matthew 24:3; King James Version) The Bible calls this time period "the last days " and the "time of the end, " or "end times. " (2 Timothy 3:1; Daniel 8:​19; Easy-to-Read Version) The following are some outstanding features of last-days, or end-times, prophecies:
War on a large scale.​ Matthew 24:7; Revelation 6:4.
Famine.​ Matthew 24:7; Revelation 6:​5, 6.
Great earthquakes.​ Luke 21:11.
Pestilences, or epidemics of "terrible diseases. "​ Luke 21:11, Contemporary English Version.
Increase of crime.​ Matthew 24:12.
Ruining of the earth by mankind.​ Revelation 11:18.
Deterioration of people’s attitudes, as shown by many who are "unthankful, disloyal, . . . not open to any agreement, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, without love of goodness, betrayers, headstrong, puffed up with pride. "​ 2 Timothy 3:​1-4.
Breakdown of the family, with people who have "no natural affection " and children who are "disobedient to parents. "​ 2 Timothy 3:​2, 3.
Love of God growing cold in most people.​ Matthew 24:12.
Noteworthy displays of religious hypocrisy.​ 2 Timothy 3:5.
Increased understanding of Bible prophecies, including those related to the last days.​ Daniel 12:4.
Global preaching of the good news of the Kingdom.​ Matthew 24:14.
Widespread apathy and even ridicule toward the evidence of the approaching end.​ Matthew 24:37-​39; 2 Peter 3:​3, 4.
The simultaneous fulfillment of all these prophecies, not just a few or even most of them.​ Matthew 24:33.
Are we living in "the last days "?
Yes.
World conditions as well as Bible chronology indicate that the last days began in 1914.
At that time, God’s Kingdom began ruling in heaven, and one of its first actions was to expel Satan the Devil and the demons from heaven and restrict their activity to the earth.
(Revelation 12:​7-​12) Satan’s influence on mankind can be seen in many of the bad attitudes and actions that make the last days "critical times hard to deal with. "​ 2 Timothy 3:1.
A Brain Pathologist Explains His Faith
PROFESSOR Rajesh Kalaria, of Newcastle University, England, has studied the human brain for more than 40 years.
He used to believe in evolution.
But later, he changed his views.
Awake! asked him about his work and faith.
Please tell us about your religious background.
My father was born in India, and my mother, although of Indian origin, was born in Uganda.
Their lives were largely governed by Hindu customs.
I am the second of three children.
We lived in Nairobi, Kenya.
Many other Hindu people lived nearby.
What stimulated your interest in science?
I was always interested in animals, and I often went hiking and camping with my friends to see the spectacular wildlife.
My initial goal was to be a veterinary surgeon.
But after graduating from a technical college in Nairobi, I went to England to study pathology at the University of London.
Later, I specialized in research into the human brain.
Did your studies affect your religious beliefs?
The more I studied science, the harder I found it to believe in Hindu mythology and traditions, such as the worship of animals and images.
Why did you accept the teaching of evolution?
In my younger years, many people around me held the view that human evolution began in Africa, and we often discussed this idea at school.
Also, the teachers and university professors gave us students the impression that all respected scientists believe in evolution.
In time you reconsidered the question of the origin of life.
I had been studying biology and anatomy for some years when a fellow student told me what he was learning about the Bible from Jehovah’s Witnesses.
I became curious.
So when the Witnesses held an assembly at our college hall in Nairobi, I attended.
Later, two Witness missionaries explained some Bible teachings to me.
Their belief in a Grand Designer who has the answers to life’s big questions did not sound like mythology.
It appealed to me as being reasonable.
Did your medical knowledge hinder your belief in creation?
On the contrary!
As I studied anatomy, I saw how well-designed and complex living things are.
To attribute such a high level of sophistication to an unguided process no longer made sense to me.
Can you give us an example?
I have studied the human brain since the early 1970’s, and this remarkable organ never ceases to amaze me.
It is the seat of thought and memory and the control center for many bodily functions.
The brain is also the hub of our many senses, interpreting information that comes from both inside and outside the body.
Our brain functions the way it does largely because of its complex chemistry and intricate networks of neurons, the primary brain cells.
The human brain has many billions of neurons, which communicate with one another through long fibers called axons.
From these, a single neuron may make many thousands of connections with other neurons by way of branching fibers called dendrites.
As a result, the total number of connections in the brain is astronomical!
What is more, this dense forest of neurons and dendrites is, not chaotic, but precise.
It is an amazing feat of "wiring. "
Please explain.
The wiring progresses in a most orderly way during a baby’s development in the womb as well as postnatally.
Neurons send out fibers to target neurons that may be a few centimeters away​ a vast distance on the cellular level.
The target of a fiber, by the way, may be not just a specific cell but a specific part of that cell.
As a new fiber branches out from a neuron, it is guided by chemical signposts that say such things as "stop, " "go, " or "turn " until the fiber reaches its target.
Without clear instructions, growing fibers would soon get lost.
The whole process is brilliantly orchestrated, starting with the instructions written in our DNA.
That said, we are far from understanding fully how the brain develops and functions, including how it forms memories, emotions, and thoughts.
For me, just the fact that the brain works​ not to mention how well it works and how beautifully it develops ​points to a mind far superior to our own.
Why did you become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses?
The Witnesses showed me evidence that the Bible is God’s Word.
For example, the Bible is not a science book, but when it touches on scientific matters, it is consistently correct.
It also contains accurate prophecies.
And it improves the lives of those who apply its teachings.
My own life is evidence of that.
Since I became one of Jehovah’s Witnesses in 1973, the Bible has been my guidebook.
As a result, my life has become truly satisfying and purposeful.
An Embryologist Explains His Faith
PROFESSOR Yan-Der Hsuuw is the director of embryo research at Taiwan’s National Pingtung University of Science and Technology.
He once believed in evolution, but after becoming a research scientist, he changed his mind.
He explained his reasons to Awake!
Please tell us a little about your background.
Yan-Der Hsuuw
I was born in 1966 and grew up in Taiwan.
My parents’ religion was based on both Taoism and Buddhism.
Although we worshipped our ancestors and prayed to images, we never entertained the concept of a personal Creator.
Why did you study biology?
As a child, I liked caring for pets, and I wanted to learn how to relieve animals and people of suffering.
For a time, I studied veterinary medicine, and later I studied embryology a field that I hoped would also shed light on the origin of life.
You believed in evolution at the time.
Can you tell us why?
The university professors taught evolution, claiming that evidence supports it.
I believed them.
Why did you start reading the Bible?
My motive was twofold.
First, I reasoned that of the many gods that people worship, one must be greater than the others.
But which one?
Second, I knew that the Bible is a highly respected book.
So I joined Bible study classes.
When I started studying at Belgium’s Catholic University of Leuven in 1992, I visited a Catholic church and asked the priest to help me understand the Bible, but he declined my request.
So how was your spiritual hunger satisfied?
Two years later, while I was still in Belgium doing scientific research, I met a Polish lady named Ruth, who was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
She had learned Chinese in order to help university students who wanted to learn about God.
I had prayed for such help, so I was delighted to meet her.
Ruth showed me that the Bible, while not a science book, is in harmony with science.
For example, the Bible writer David said in prayer to God: "Your eyes even saw me as an embryo; all its parts were written in your book regarding the days when they were formed, before any of them existed. "
(Psalm 139:16) Although David was using poetic language, in principle, he was right!
Even before body parts form, the instructions for their development are all there.
The accuracy of the Bible helped convince me that it is God’s Word.
I also began to appreciate that there is only one true God, Jehovah.
1
What convinced you that God created life?
A goal of scientific research is to find the truth, not to support preconceived ideas.
My study of embryo development led me to change my view that is, I concluded that life was created.
To illustrate, engineers design assembly lines so that the right parts are fitted together in the right order and in the right way.
Embryo development is somewhat similar but vastly more complex.
The process all starts with a single fertilized cell, doesn’t it?
That microscopic cell then divides, starting the process of cell division.
For a time, the number of cells doubles every 12 to 24 hours.
Early in this process, cells called stem cells form.
2
Stem cells can produce almost any of the 200 or so different cell types needed for a fully formed baby, such as blood cells, bone cells, nerve cells, and so on.
My study of embryo development led me to conclude that life was created
The right cells must be produced in the right order and at the right places.
First they assemble into tissues that will in turn assemble themselves into organs and limbs.
What engineer even dreams of writing instructions for such a process?
Yet, the instructions for embryo development are superbly written in DNA.
When I consider the beauty of it all, I’m convinced that life was designed by God.
Why did you become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses?
In a word, love.
Jesus Christ said: "By this all will know that you are my disciples if you have love among yourselves. "
(John 13:35) That love is impartial.
It is not influenced by a person’s nationality, culture, or skin color.
I both observed and experienced that kind of love when I began to associate with the Witnesses.
A Kidney Specialist Explains Her Faith
Dr. Céline Granolleras is a medical doctor in France who specializes in kidney disease.
More than 20 years after becoming a doctor, she came to the conclusion that there is a Creator who cares for us.
Awake! asked her about her work and her faith.
Tell us about your childhood.
My family moved to France from Spain when I was nine.
My parents were Catholic, but I stopped believing in God when I was 16.
For me, religion had no bearing on reality.
If anyone asked me how life began if there is no God, I replied, "For now, scientists cannot explain it, but one day they will. "
What made you study kidney disease?
I studied at a medical school in Montpellier, France.
A professor there spoke to me about working in nephrology, a branch of medicine involving the kidneys.
The work combined research with the care of patients.
That was just what I wanted.
In 1990, I began taking part in research on the clinical use of recombinant erythropoietin (EPO) to control the production of red blood cells in our bones.
At that time, it was considered a relatively new field of research.
What made you start thinking about God?
Back in 1979, my husband, Floréal, started studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses.
But I was not interested.
As a child, I had had enough of religion.
Nevertheless, my husband and children became Witnesses, and soon nearly all our friends were Witnesses.
One of them, Patricia, suggested that I try praying.
"If there is nobody in heaven, you don’t risk anything, " she said.
"But if there is, you will see what happens. "
Years later, I started to wonder about the meaning of life, and I remembered Patricia’s words.
I began to pray for understanding.
What made you wonder about the meaning of life?
The terrorist attack on the World Trade Center in New York made me wonder why there is so much evil in society.
I thought: ‘Religious extremism endangers our future.
Yet here I am surrounded by Jehovah’s Witnesses who are peaceful.
They are not extremists.
They follow the Bible.
Perhaps I should look into what it says.’
So I began reading the Bible for myself.
As a doctor, did you find it difficult to believe in a Creator?
No.
I had a deep respect for our body’s sophisticated design.
For example, the way our kidneys control the amount of red cells in our blood is awe-inspiring.
Why do you say that?
It struck me that only God could design such an elegant system
As you may know, red blood cells transport oxygen.
If you lose a lot of blood or if you go to a high altitude, your body will lack oxygen.
Our kidneys have oxygen sensors.
When they detect an oxygen shortage in the blood, they activate the production of EPO, and the level of EPO in the blood may rise as much as a thousandfold.
The EPO stimulates the bone marrow to produce more red cells, which in turn transport more oxygen.
It’s wonderful!
Strangely, I studied this process for ten years before it struck me that only God could design such an elegant system.
What was your impression of the Bible?
I had read lots of history books and famous novels, but I immediately recognized that the Bible was different.
Its advice is so practical that it must come from a source higher than man.
Jesus’ character fascinated me.
I saw that he was a real person.
He had feelings, and he had friends.
Since I didn’t want to use the publications of Jehovah’s Witnesses, I did research in encyclopedias and other reference works when questions arose.
What did you research?
I researched history books . . .
Finally, I concluded that this Bible prophecy had come true on time
Among other things, I was intrigued by the way the Bible foretold the year of Jesus’ baptism.
It shows exactly how much time would elapse between the 20th year of the reign of the Persian ruler Artaxerxes and the year Jesus would present himself as the Messiah.
I am accustomed to doing research it is part of my job.
So I researched history books to confirm the dates of Artaxerxes’ rule and the dates of Jesus’ ministry.
Finally, I concluded that this Bible prophecy had come true on time and that it must have been inspired by God.
A Software Designer Explains His Faith
DR. FAN YU began his career as a research mathematician at the China Institute of Atomic Energy, near Beijing.
At that time he was an atheist and believed in the theory of evolution.
But now Dr. Yu believes that life was designed and created by God.
Awake! asked him about his faith.
Please tell us about your background.
I was born in 1959 in Fuzhou City, Jiangxi Province, China.
By the time I was eight years old, the country was experiencing the effects of what is now called the Cultural Revolution.
My father, a civil engineer, was ordered to build a railway in a distant wilderness area.
For years he could visit us only once a year.
During that time I lived with my mother, who was a teacher in an elementary school.
We actually lived in the very school where she taught.
In 1970, we had to move to Liufang, at the time a poor rural village in the Linchuan District, where food was scarce.
What did your family believe?
My father was not interested in religion or politics.
My mother was a Buddhist.
At school, I was taught that life evolved by natural processes, and I believed what my teachers said.
Why did you become interested in mathematics?
I was attracted to mathematics because it involves seeking truth through logical reasoning.
I went to university shortly after the leader of the revolution, Mao Tse-tung, died in 1976.
I chose mathematics as my main subject.
After I obtained a master’s degree, my first job involved mathematical research for the design of nuclear reactors.
What was your first impression of the Bible?
In 1987, I came to the United States to pursue doctorate studies at Texas A&M University.
I was aware that in America, many people believe in God and read the Bible.
Also, I had heard that the Bible contains a lot of practical wisdom, so I thought I should read it.
The teachings of the Bible sounded practical.
But I found some parts hard to understand and soon stopped reading it.
How was your interest in the Bible renewed?
The idea of a Creator was new to me, so I decided to do my own research on the subject
In 1990, one of Jehovah’s Witnesses called at my house and showed me what the Bible says about a better future for mankind.
She arranged for a married couple to come and help me understand the Bible.
Later, my wife, Liping, who had taught high school physics in China and who was also an atheist, began studying the Bible as well.
We learned what the Bible says about the origin of life.
The idea of a Creator was new to me, so I decided to do my own research on the subject.
What Is the Sign of "the Last Days, " or "End Times "?
The Bible’s answer
The Bible describes events and conditions that would mark "the conclusion of the [current] system of things, " or "the end of the world. "
(Matthew 24:3; King James Version) The Bible calls this time period "the last days " and the "time of the end, " or "end times. " (2 Timothy 3:1; Daniel 8:​19; Easy-to-Read Version) The following are some outstanding features of last-days, or end-times, prophecies:
War on a large scale.​ Matthew 24:7; Revelation 6:4.
Famine.​ Matthew 24:7; Revelation 6:​5, 6.
Great earthquakes.​ Luke 21:11.
Pestilences, or epidemics of "terrible diseases. "​ Luke 21:11, Contemporary English Version.
Increase of crime.​ Matthew 24:12.
Ruining of the earth by mankind.​ Revelation 11:18.
Deterioration of people’s attitudes, as shown by many who are "unthankful, disloyal, . . . not open to any agreement, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, without love of goodness, betrayers, headstrong, puffed up with pride. "​ 2 Timothy 3:​1-4.
Breakdown of the family, with people who have "no natural affection " and children who are "disobedient to parents. "​ 2 Timothy 3:​2, 3.
Love of God growing cold in most people.​ Matthew 24:12.
Noteworthy displays of religious hypocrisy.​ 2 Timothy 3:5.
Increased understanding of Bible prophecies, including those related to the last days.​ Daniel 12:4.
Global preaching of the good news of the Kingdom.​ Matthew 24:14.
Widespread apathy and even ridicule toward the evidence of the approaching end.​ Matthew 24:37-​39; 2 Peter 3:​3, 4.
The simultaneous fulfillment of all these prophecies, not just a few or even most of them.​ Matthew 24:33.
Are we living in "the last days "?
Yes.
World conditions as well as Bible chronology indicate that the last days began in 1914.
At that time, God’s Kingdom began ruling in heaven, and one of its first actions was to expel Satan the Devil and the demons from heaven and restrict their activity to the earth.
(Revelation 12:​7-​12) Satan’s influence on mankind can be seen in many of the bad attitudes and actions that make the last days "critical times hard to deal with. "​ 2 Timothy 3:1.
A Brain Pathologist Explains His Faith
PROFESSOR Rajesh Kalaria, of Newcastle University, England, has studied the human brain for more than 40 years.
He used to believe in evolution.
But later, he changed his views.
Awake! asked him about his work and faith.
Please tell us about your religious background.
My father was born in India, and my mother, although of Indian origin, was born in Uganda.
Their lives were largely governed by Hindu customs.
I am the second of three children.
We lived in Nairobi, Kenya.
Many other Hindu people lived nearby.
What stimulated your interest in science?
I was always interested in animals, and I often went hiking and camping with my friends to see the spectacular wildlife.
My initial goal was to be a veterinary surgeon.
But after graduating from a technical college in Nairobi, I went to England to study pathology at the University of London.
Later, I specialized in research into the human brain.
Did your studies affect your religious beliefs?
The more I studied science, the harder I found it to believe in Hindu mythology and traditions, such as the worship of animals and images.
Why did you accept the teaching of evolution?
In my younger years, many people around me held the view that human evolution began in Africa, and we often discussed this idea at school.
Also, the teachers and university professors gave us students the impression that all respected scientists believe in evolution.
In time you reconsidered the question of the origin of life.
Why?
I had been studying biology and anatomy for some years when a fellow student told me what he was learning about the Bible from Jehovah’s Witnesses.
I became curious.
So when the Witnesses held an assembly at our college hall in Nairobi, I attended.
Later, two Witness missionaries explained some Bible teachings to me.
Their belief in a Grand Designer who has the answers to life’s big questions did not sound like mythology.
It appealed to me as being reasonable.
Did your medical knowledge hinder your belief in creation?
On the contrary!
As I studied anatomy, I saw how well-designed and complex living things are.
To attribute such a high level of sophistication to an unguided process no longer made sense to me.
Can you give us an example?
I have studied the human brain since the early 1970’s, and this remarkable organ never ceases to amaze me.
It is the seat of thought and memory and the control center for many bodily functions.
The brain is also the hub of our many senses, interpreting information that comes from both inside and outside the body.
Our brain functions the way it does largely because of its complex chemistry and intricate networks of neurons, the primary brain cells.
The human brain has many billions of neurons, which communicate with one another through long fibers called axons.
From these, a single neuron may make many thousands of connections with other neurons by way of branching fibers called dendrites.
As a result, the total number of connections in the brain is astronomical!
What is more, this dense forest of neurons and dendrites is, not chaotic, but precise.
It is an amazing feat of "wiring. "
Please explain.
The wiring progresses in a most orderly way during a baby’s development in the womb as well as postnatally.
Neurons send out fibers to target neurons that may be a few centimeters away​ a vast distance on the cellular level.
The target of a fiber, by the way, may be not just a specific cell but a specific part of that cell.
As a new fiber branches out from a neuron, it is guided by chemical signposts that say such things as "stop, " "go, " or "turn " until the fiber reaches its target.
Without clear instructions, growing fibers would soon get lost.
The whole process is brilliantly orchestrated, starting with the instructions written in our DNA.
That said, we are far from understanding fully how the brain develops and functions, including how it forms memories, emotions, and thoughts.
For me, just the fact that the brain works​ not to mention how well it works and how beautifully it develops ​points to a mind far superior to our own.
Why did you become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses?
The Witnesses showed me evidence that the Bible is God’s Word.
For example, the Bible is not a science book, but when it touches on scientific matters, it is consistently correct.
It also contains accurate prophecies.
And it improves the lives of those who apply its teachings.
My own life is evidence of that.
Since I became one of Jehovah’s Witnesses in 1973, the Bible has been my guidebook.
As a result, my life has become truly satisfying and purposeful.
An Embryologist Explains His Faith
PROFESSOR Yan-Der Hsuuw is the director of embryo research at Taiwan’s National Pingtung University of Science and Technology.
He once believed in evolution, but after becoming a research scientist, he changed his mind.
He explained his reasons to Awake!
Please tell us a little about your background.
Yan-Der Hsuuw
I was born in 1966 and grew up in Taiwan.
My parents’ religion was based on both Taoism and Buddhism.
Although we worshipped our ancestors and prayed to images, we never entertained the concept of a personal Creator.
Why did you study biology?
As a child, I liked caring for pets, and I wanted to learn how to relieve animals and people of suffering.
For a time, I studied veterinary medicine, and later I studied embryology a field that I hoped would also shed light on the origin of life.
You believed in evolution at the time.
Can you tell us why?
The university professors taught evolution, claiming that evidence supports it.
I believed them.
Why did you start reading the Bible?
My motive was twofold.
First, I reasoned that of the many gods that people worship, one must be greater than the others.
But which one?
Second, I knew that the Bible is a highly respected book.
So I joined Bible study classes.
When I started studying at Belgium’s Catholic University of Leuven in 1992, I visited a Catholic church and asked the priest to help me understand the Bible, but he declined my request.
So how was your spiritual hunger satisfied?
Two years later, while I was still in Belgium doing scientific research, I met a Polish lady named Ruth, who was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
She had learned Chinese in order to help university students who wanted to learn about God.
I had prayed for such help, so I was delighted to meet her.
Ruth showed me that the Bible, while not a science book, is in harmony with science.
For example, the Bible writer David said in prayer to God: "Your eyes even saw me as an embryo; all its parts were written in your book regarding the days when they were formed, before any of them existed. "
(Psalm 139:16) Although David was using poetic language, in principle, he was right!
Even before body parts form, the instructions for their development are all there.
The accuracy of the Bible helped convince me that it is God’s Word.
I also began to appreciate that there is only one true God, Jehovah.
1
What convinced you that God created life?
A goal of scientific research is to find the truth, not to support preconceived ideas.
My study of embryo development led me to change my view that is, I concluded that life was created.
To illustrate, engineers design assembly lines so that the right parts are fitted together in the right order and in the right way.
Embryo development is somewhat similar but vastly more complex.
The process all starts with a single fertilized cell, doesn’t it?
That microscopic cell then divides, starting the process of cell division.
For a time, the number of cells doubles every 12 to 24 hours.
Early in this process, cells called stem cells form.
2
Stem cells can produce almost any of the 200 or so different cell types needed for a fully formed baby, such as blood cells, bone cells, nerve cells, and so on.
My study of embryo development led me to conclude that life was created
The right cells must be produced in the right order and at the right places.
First they assemble into tissues that will in turn assemble themselves into organs and limbs.
What engineer even dreams of writing instructions for such a process?
Yet, the instructions for embryo development are superbly written in DNA.
When I consider the beauty of it all, I’m convinced that life was designed by God.
Why did you become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses?
In a word, love.
Jesus Christ said: "By this all will know that you are my disciples if you have love among yourselves. "
(John 13:35) That love is impartial.
It is not influenced by a person’s nationality, culture, or skin color.
I both observed and experienced that kind of love when I began to associate with the Witnesses.
A Kidney Specialist Explains Her Faith
Dr. Céline Granolleras is a medical doctor in France who specializes in kidney disease.
More than 20 years after becoming a doctor, she came to the conclusion that there is a Creator who cares for us.
Awake! asked her about her work and her faith.
Tell us about your childhood.
My family moved to France from Spain when I was nine.
My parents were Catholic, but I stopped believing in God when I was 16.
For me, religion had no bearing on reality.
If anyone asked me how life began if there is no God, I replied, "For now, scientists cannot explain it, but one day they will. "
What made you study kidney disease?
I studied at a medical school in Montpellier, France.
A professor there spoke to me about working in nephrology, a branch of medicine involving the kidneys.
The work combined research with the care of patients.
That was just what I wanted.
In 1990, I began taking part in research on the clinical use of recombinant erythropoietin (EPO) to control the production of red blood cells in our bones.
At that time, it was considered a relatively new field of research.
What made you start thinking about God?
Back in 1979, my husband, Floréal, started studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses.
But I was not interested.
As a child, I had had enough of religion.
Nevertheless, my husband and children became Witnesses, and soon nearly all our friends were Witnesses.
One of them, Patricia, suggested that I try praying.
"If there is nobody in heaven, you don’t risk anything, " she said.
"But if there is, you will see what happens. "
Years later, I started to wonder about the meaning of life, and I remembered Patricia’s words.
I began to pray for understanding.
What made you wonder about the meaning of life?
The terrorist attack on the World Trade Center in New York made me wonder why there is so much evil in society.
I thought: ‘Religious extremism endangers our future.
Yet here I am surrounded by Jehovah’s Witnesses who are peaceful.
They are not extremists.
They follow the Bible.
Perhaps I should look into what it says.’
So I began reading the Bible for myself.
As a doctor, did you find it difficult to believe in a Creator?
No.
I had a deep respect for our body’s sophisticated design.
For example, the way our kidneys control the amount of red cells in our blood is awe-inspiring.
Why do you say that?
It struck me that only God could design such an elegant system
As you may know, red blood cells transport oxygen.
If you lose a lot of blood or if you go to a high altitude, your body will lack oxygen.
Our kidneys have oxygen sensors.
When they detect an oxygen shortage in the blood, they activate the production of EPO, and the level of EPO in the blood may rise as much as a thousandfold.
The EPO stimulates the bone marrow to produce more red cells, which in turn transport more oxygen.
It’s wonderful!
Strangely, I studied this process for ten years before it struck me that only God could design such an elegant system.
What was your impression of the Bible?
I had read lots of history books and famous novels, but I immediately recognized that the Bible was different.
Its advice is so practical that it must come from a source higher than man.
Jesus’ character fascinated me.
I saw that he was a real person.
He had feelings, and he had friends.
Since I didn’t want to use the publications of Jehovah’s Witnesses, I did research in encyclopedias and other reference works when questions arose.
What did you research?
I researched history books . . .
Finally, I concluded that this Bible prophecy had come true on time
Among other things, I was intrigued by the way the Bible foretold the year of Jesus’ baptism.
It shows exactly how much time would elapse between the 20th year of the reign of the Persian ruler Artaxerxes and the year Jesus would present himself as the Messiah.
I am accustomed to doing research it is part of my job.
So I researched history books to confirm the dates of Artaxerxes’ rule and the dates of Jesus’ ministry.
Finally, I concluded that this Bible prophecy had come true on time and that it must have been inspired by God.
A Software Designer Explains His Faith
DR. FAN YU began his career as a research mathematician at the China Institute of Atomic Energy, near Beijing.
At that time he was an atheist and believed in the theory of evolution.
But now Dr. Yu believes that life was designed and created by God.
Awake! asked him about his faith.
Please tell us about your background.
I was born in 1959 in Fuzhou City, Jiangxi Province, China.
By the time I was eight years old, the country was experiencing the effects of what is now called the Cultural Revolution.
My father, a civil engineer, was ordered to build a railway in a distant wilderness area.
For years he could visit us only once a year.
During that time I lived with my mother, who was a teacher in an elementary school.
We actually lived in the very school where she taught.
In 1970, we had to move to Liufang, at the time a poor rural village in the Linchuan District, where food was scarce.
What did your family believe?
My father was not interested in religion or politics.
My mother was a Buddhist.
At school, I was taught that life evolved by natural processes, and I believed what my teachers said.
Why did you become interested in mathematics?
I was attracted to mathematics because it involves seeking truth through logical reasoning.
I went to university shortly after the leader of the revolution, Mao Tse-tung, died in 1976.
I chose mathematics as my main subject.
After I obtained a master’s degree, my first job involved mathematical research for the design of nuclear reactors.
What was your first impression of the Bible?
In 1987, I came to the United States to pursue doctorate studies at Texas A&M University.
I was aware that in America, many people believe in God and read the Bible.
Also, I had heard that the Bible contains a lot of practical wisdom, so I thought I should read it.
The teachings of the Bible sounded practical.
But I found some parts hard to understand and soon stopped reading it.
How was your interest in the Bible renewed?
The idea of a Creator was new to me, so I decided to do my own research on the subject
In 1990, one of Jehovah’s Witnesses called at my house and showed me what the Bible says about a better future for mankind.
She arranged for a married couple to come and help me understand the Bible.
Later, my wife, Liping, who had taught high school physics in China and who was also an atheist, began studying the Bible as well.
We learned what the Bible says about the origin of life.
The scripture they read states: "Lift up your eyes to heaven and see.
Who has created these things? . . .
Because of his vast dynamic energy and his awe-inspiring power, not one of them is missing. "
This statement intrigued me.
It also seemed reasonable that only an intelligent Source of energy could account for the order in the universe.
Did your view of evolution change?
I gradually realized that the various theories of evolution lacked rigorous scientific proof.
In fact, they are basically stories invented to explain how the remarkable designs found within living things, such as the immune system, could originate in a mindless manner.
The more I studied the immune system, the more I realized just how complex and effective it is.
Thus, my research led me to conclude that life is a product of an intelligent Creator.
My research led me to conclude that life is a product of an intelligent Creator
Can you give us some evidence of design?
The immune system is actually an astonishing array of structures and mechanisms designed to defend us from a wide variety of agents, including bacteria and viruses.
The mechanisms, in turn, can be grouped into two complementary systems.
The first mobilizes an attack on invading microbes within hours.
The second takes several days to respond but targets the invaders like a well-aimed arrow.
This second system also has a good memory, so that if a specific invader returns years later, this enemy will be met with a rapid response.
The whole system works so well that often you do not even realize that you have been infected and effectively defended.
Also amazing is the way the immune system distinguishes between foreign substances and the hundreds of cell types that make up our body.
Tell us, what happens when a microbe enters our body?
Microbes sneak in through our breath, our food, our urogenital tract, or breaks in our skin.
When the immune system detects intruders, it sets in motion a cascade of reactions involving dozens of precisely designed proteins.
Each component in this cascade activates the next to amplify the counterattack.
The process is mind-boggling!
Could we say, then, that your knowledge of science has strengthened your faith in God?
Absolutely!
The power and sophistication of our immune system points to a wise and loving Creator.
I might add that science has also strengthened my faith in the Bible.
For example, Proverbs 17:22 tells us that "a joyful heart is good medicine. "
Researchers have discovered that our state of mind can influence our immune system.
Stress, for instance, can weaken our immune response.
Many of your peers don’t believe in God. Why is that?
The reasons vary.
Some, as was true of me, simply accept what they were taught.
Perhaps they assume that evolution is backed up by good science.
Others give little thought to how life began.
As a mathematician, I was trained to calculate the probabilities of events.
I had also learned that for life to occur spontaneously, proteins would already have to exist.
So I tried to calculate the probability of a protein originating by an unguided process.
Proteins are among the most complex molecules known, and living cells can have thousands of different types of proteins interacting in very precise ways.
I realized, as others have, that the spontaneous formation of a protein is so improbable that it is essentially impossible!
I have not read anything in evolution theory that explains to my satisfaction how these highly complex molecules could, in effect, create themselves let alone the living systems of which they form an integral part.
To me, the facts pointed to a Creator.
What convinced you that the Bible comes from God?
As I continued studying with the help of Jehovah’s Witnesses, I learned that the Bible contains many detailed prophecies that have been fulfilled.
I also began experiencing the benefits of applying Bible principles.
I wondered, ‘How could Bible writers living thousands of years ago write words of wisdom that remain so practical today?’
Progressively, I realized that the Bible is God’s Word.
What continues to convince you that there is a Creator?
When I give thought to the many elements in nature, I cannot help but believe in a Creator.
Currently I design software for computers, and I often feel amazed at how our brain outperforms computer programs.
For example, our brain’s ability to recognize speech is mind-boggling.
Most of us can easily understand speech, even if it includes incomplete sentences, laughter, coughs, stutters, accents, echoes, background noise, or telephone distortion.
You might think this unremarkable.
But software designers know otherwise.
Even the best speech-recognition software is a far cry from the human brain.
Unlike the most complex computers, our brain can discern emotions, recognize accents, and identify speakers by their voice characteristics.
Software designers are researching how computers could mimic the human brain’s ability to recognize speech.
I am convinced that in doing so they are actually studying the handiwork of God.
An Experimental Physicist Explains His Faith
WENLONG HE first studied physics in Suzhou, Jiangsu Province, China.
He helps edit an international journal of technology and has had dozens of papers published in scientific literature.
At present, Wenlong He works for Scotland’s University of Strathclyde.
As a youth, he believed in evolution, but later he concluded that life was created.
Tell us about your background.
Wenlong He
I was born in 1963 and grew up in China, in a village south of the Yangtze River in Jiangsu Province.
It is a subtropical area famous for its food production, so it is often called the land of rice and fish.
As a child, I used to wonder: ‘Why does nature provide so many tasty foods?
Did they come about by chance?
Which came first the chicken or the egg?’
Atheism is predominant in China, so at school I was taught about evolution.
What about your family?
My parents were atheists.
My mother did farmwork, while my father worked as an architect and established a construction company.
I’m the eldest of their five sons.
Sadly, two of my brothers died young.
That caused me much grief, and I wondered: ‘Why do people die?
Will I ever see my brothers again?’
Why did you study science?
I wanted to study physics because I was intrigued by the natural world and I thought physics might answer the questions that had intrigued me since childhood.
What is your field of research?
I explore ways of accelerating charged particles to speeds close to the speed of light.
I do this to study the structure of atoms.
I also investigate how to generate high-power radiation with a frequency between that of microwave and infrared radiation.
Although my research has commercial value, it is also linked to efforts to understand how the universe began.
How did you become interested in the Bible?
In 1998, two of Jehovah’s Witnesses visited my home.
They offered to show me the Bible’s answers to my questions.
My wife, Huabi, who is also a research scientist, joined us.
We had never seen a Bible before, but we were impressed by its practical advice.
We noticed how the Witness couple who visited us benefited by applying Bible principles.
They were happy and enjoyed an uncomplicated way of life.
But what the Bible says about God set me to wondering again whether the universe could have been created.
As a physicist, my job is to understand nature.
So I decided to give the facts some careful thought.
So I decided to give the facts some careful thought
What facts did you consider?
First, I knew that a closed system cannot become more organized or remain organized unless acted upon by an external agent.
That is the second law of thermodynamics.
Since the universe and life on earth are highly ordered, I concluded that they must be products of an external agent, a Creator.
The second fact was that the universe and the earth seem to be specifically designed to support life.
What evidence of design did you see?
Practically all life on earth depends on energy from the sun.
This energy travels through space as radiation.
It comes to earth in a vast spectrum of wavelengths.
The shortest are the lethal gamma rays.
Then come X-rays, ultraviolet rays, visible light, infrared, microwaves, and the longest of all, radio waves.
Remarkably, our atmosphere blocks much harmful radiation while allowing other needed radiation to reach the earth’s surface.
Why did that fact impress you?
I was intrigued by the introduction to the Bible’s creation account and its reference to light.
It states: "God said: ‘Let there be light.’
Then there was light. "
Only a very narrow band of the vast spectrum of solar radiation is visible light, but light is vital for life.
Plants need it to produce food, and we need light to see.
The atmosphere’s special transparency to light cannot be a coincidence.
Even more remarkable is the tiny amount of ultraviolet light that reaches the earth’s surface. Why is that significant?
Some ultraviolet radiation is critical.
We need a small amount of it on our skin to produce vitamin D, which is vital for bone health and evidently for protection from cancer and other diseases.
However, too much of this particular radiation causes skin cancer and eye cataracts.
In its natural state, the atmosphere allows only a tiny amount of this ultraviolet radiation to reach the earth’s surface and it is just the right amount.
For me, that is evidence that someone designed the earth to sustain life.
Gradually Huabi and I became convinced that there is a Creator and that he inspired the Bible.
In 2005, we became Jehovah’s Witnesses, and now we share in teaching the Bible to others.
I Am Convinced That There Is a Creator "
Frédéric Dumoulin
For more than a decade, Frédéric Dumoulin has worked in the field of pharmaceutical research at Ghent University in Belgium.
At one time he was an atheist.
But later Frédéric became convinced that God created life.
Awake! asked Frédéric who is now one of Jehovah’s Witnesses about his work and his faith.
Did religion have any role in your childhood?
My mother was Roman Catholic.
But when I read about the Crusades and the Inquisition, I felt disgusted with religion and wanted nothing more to do with it.
I also read about non-Christian religions and saw that they were no better.
When I was 14, I reasoned that the prevalence of corruption in religion proves that God doesn’t exist.
So when I was taught the evolution theory at school, I concluded that life originated by natural processes.
How were you attracted to science?
When I was seven, I was given a microscope and it became my favorite toy.
Among other things, I used it to examine fascinating insects, such as butterflies.
How did you become interested in the origin of life?
When I was 22, I met a scientist who was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
She believed that God created life.
That seemed really strange to me.
I thought I could easily prove her faith to be ridiculous.
But to my surprise, she had sensible answers to my questions.
I became curious about people who believe in God.
A few months later, I met another Witness who was quite knowledgeable about medical matters.
When he offered to explain what he believed, I accepted his offer because I wanted to know why people believe in God.
I wanted to save him from his delusion.
Did you convince him that he was mistaken?
No, I didn’t.
I began researching theories on the origin of life.
To my surprise, I found that some eminent scientists say that even the simplest living cell is so complex that it couldn’t have originated on earth.
Some of them think such cells came from outer space.
There is a lot of disagreement about how life began.
Is there a point of agreement?
Strangely, many scientists agree that somehow natural processes caused life to spring from nonliving matter.
I began to wonder, ‘If they don’t know how life could come about without a Creator, how can they be so sure that it happened that way?’
I began to look into what the Bible says about the origin of life.
What conclusions did you draw about the Bible?
The more I learned from the Bible, the more I became convinced that it’s true.
For example, only recently have scientists found evidence that the universe had a beginning.
But the opening verse of the Bible, written some 3,500 years ago, says: "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. "
And I found that whenever the Bible comments on scientific matters, it is accurate.
I found that whenever the Bible comments on scientific matters, it is accurate
Did your knowledge of science make believing in God difficult?
No.
When I first came to believe in God, I had been studying science at a university for three years.
To this day, the more I study the design of living things, the more I am convinced that there is a Creator.
Can you give us an example?
I’ve studied the effects of medications and toxins on living creatures.
A design that impresses me is how our brain is protected from dangerous substances and from bacteria.
There is a barrier that keeps our blood separate from our brain cells.
What is remarkable about that?
Over a hundred years ago, researchers noticed that substances introduced into the bloodstream enter every area of the body except the brain and spinal cord.
That fact is astonishing to me, because an immense network of tiny capillary vessels takes blood to every cell in the brain.
All brain cells are cleaned, fed, and oxygenated by blood.
So, how can our blood be kept separate from our brain cells?
For many years it was a mystery. How does the barrier work?
Microscopic blood vessels are not like plastic tubes that keep what’s inside separate from what’s outside.
The walls of blood vessels are made of cells.
These cells allow substances and microbes to pass through them and between them.
However, the cells making up the blood vessels in our brain are different.
They’re tightly connected to each other.
These cells and the tight junctions between them are amazing.
A vast array of complex mechanisms ensure that some things such as oxygen, carbon dioxide, and glucose pass between the bloodstream and the brain in a regulated way.
But other compounds, proteins, and cells are kept out.
So the blood-brain barrier operates at a molecular level to produce physical, chemical, and electrical barriers.
For me, such design simply could not have evolved.
A Biotechnologist Explains His Faith
Dr. Hans Kristian Kotlar
In 1978, Dr. Hans Kristian Kotlar’s first job in scientific research was at the Norwegian Radium Hospital, where he studied cancer and the human immune system.
At that time, he also became interested in the origin of life.
Awake! asked him about his research and his religious faith.
What stirred your interest in the origin and meaning of life?
My father was Catholic and my mother was Protestant.
That said, they did not view religion as important.
As for me, during my teens, I wondered about the meaning of life, and I read books about Buddhism, Hinduism, and Islam.
I even asked God to reveal the truth to me.
By the 1970’s, the field of molecular biology had made some amazing advances, and I wondered if it might reveal how life began.
The mechanisms within living cells intrigued me, so I chose to study biotechnology.
I might add that most of my professors said that life evolved by natural processes, and I believed them.
Why did you take an interest in the Bible?
Two of Jehovah’s Witnesses visited our home.
Although they were pleasant, I reacted rudely and told them I was not interested. My wife overheard me.
"That was not kind, Hans Kristian, " she said.
"You have always been interested in the meaning of life. "
She was right, and I felt ashamed.
So I ran after the Witnesses.
During our conversation, I told them that I wanted to know if the Bible is in harmony with science.
How did they respond to that?
They showed me what the Bible says about the Source of the energy manifest in the universe.
I think they should ask more questions.
I was attracted by their hospitality and their faith in the Creator’s promise of a better future.
And that faith rests on research and sound reasoning, not myths or speculation.
A Microbiologist Explains Her Faith
Dr. Feng-Ling Yang
Feng-Ling Yang is a senior research assistant at the central research academy in Taipei, Taiwan.
Her work has been published in scientific journals.
She used to believe in the theory of evolution.
But then she changed her mind.
Awake! asked her about her science and her faith.
Tell us about your background.
My parents were very poor, and my mother never learned to read.
We raised pigs and grew vegetables in a flood-prone area near the city of Taipei.
My parents taught me the value of hard work, and they also taught me to help other people.
Was your family religious?
My family practiced Taoism.
We made sacrifices to the "Heaven God, " but we didn’t know anything about him.
I used to wonder: ‘Why do people suffer?
Why are people selfish?’
I read books about Taoism and Buddhism and about Eastern and Western history.
I even went to a couple of churches.
But I couldn’t find answers to my questions.
I liked mathematics and was fascinated by the way physical and chemical laws govern the structure of things.
Everything, from the immense universe to tiny microbes, has a structure that is controlled by rules.
And I wanted to understand those rules.
Why did you believe the theory of evolution to be a fact?
I was taught nothing to the contrary.
From junior high school through university, evolution was the only explanation I heard.
And then because of being a researcher in a life science, I was expected to accept evolution.
Because I was a researcher in a life science, I was expected to accept evolution
What made you start reading the Bible?
I went to live in Germany in 1996 to start my postgraduate studies.
The following year I met a lady named Simone.
She was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and she offered to show me the Bible’s answers to my questions.
When she told me that the Bible explains the purpose of life, I was intrigued.
I began getting up at half past four each morning to read the Bible for an hour.
Then I would go for a walk to meditate.
During the next year, I read the whole Bible.
I was impressed by the accuracy of its prophecies.
Gradually, I became convinced that the Bible is from God.
What were your thoughts about the origin of life?
Well, when I began giving this serious thought in the late 1990’s, molecular biologists were beginning to realize that the chemistry of life is much more elaborate than anyone had previously thought.
Of course, scientists had long known that the proteins in living cells are the most chemically sophisticated molecules in existence.
But now, they were discovering how whole assemblies of proteins are organized to form elegant machines with moving parts.
A molecular machine might be composed of over 50 proteins.
And even the simplest cell needs a collection of different machines for example, to generate power, to duplicate information, and to control access across membranes.
What did you conclude?
Well, I asked myself, ‘How did those protein machines become so well engineered?’
At the time, the unexpected complexity of cell chemistry made a number of scientists ask the same question.
A professor of biochemistry in the United States published a book arguing that the molecular machines in living cells are so complex that they could not have originated randomly.
I agreed.
I felt that life must have been created.
I asked myself, ‘How did those protein machines become so well engineered?’
I was impressed that although Simone had health problems, she traveled some 35 miles (56 km) each week to teach me the Bible.
I learned that during Germany’s Nazi era, some Witnesses were imprisoned in concentration camps for their political neutrality.
Their courage deeply impressed me.
The Witnesses’ love for God made me want to be like them.
Has believing in God benefited you?
My colleagues say that I’m happier now.
I used to feel inferior because of my poor background, so I never told anyone where I grew up and never mentioned my parents.
But I’ve learned from the Bible that God is not interested in social status.
In fact, Jesus was raised in a family that was probably as poor as mine.
Now I care for my parents and enjoy introducing them to my friends.
A Biochemist Explains Her Faith
For more than 20 years, Dr. Paola Chiozzi has worked as a molecular biologist at the University of Ferrara in Italy.
Awake! asked her about her science and her faith.
Tell us about your background.
My father was a cobbler, and my mother was a farmworker.
But I wanted to be a scientist.
The beautiful flowers, birds, and insects around my home fascinated me.
I felt that they were products of superhuman wisdom.
So you always believed in a Creator?
No.
In fact, my doubts about God began when I was a child.
My father suddenly died of a heart attack, and I wondered, ‘Why would the Creator of so much beauty allow suffering and death?’
Did your study of science help you to find an answer?
Not at first.
When I became a molecular biologist, I began to study death the normal, programmed death of the cells that make up our body.
This is very different from the uncontrolled cell death that causes inflammation and gangrene.
Until a few years ago, scientists paid little attention to this process, even though it is vital to our health.
In what way is programmed cell death vital?
Well, our body is made up of trillions of microscopic cells.
Practically all of them must die and be replaced.
Each type of cell has a different life span; some are replaced every few weeks, and others every few years.
Our body’s system of programmed cell death has to be highly controlled to maintain the delicate balance between cell death and cell formation.
What can go wrong?
Some studies indicate that when cells fail to die as they should, rheumatoid arthritis or cancer may result.
On the other hand, when cells die before they should, it could cause Parkinson’s disease or Alzheimer’s disease.
My research is linked to finding ways to treat these diseases.
How did your study of cell death affect you?
Frankly, it puzzled me.
This marvelous process was clearly designed by someone who wants us to be healthy.
So I was still left with the question, Why do people suffer and die?
I couldn’t find an answer.
But you were convinced that the system of programmed cell death was designed.
The complexity of the whole process is mind-boggling, yet its elegance displays exceptional wisdom.
I believe it’s the wisdom of God.
I use powerful microscopes to study the many complex mechanisms that regulate the process.
Some mechanisms can trigger the destruction process within seconds if need be.
The cells participate in their own self-destruction.
The process is so well-designed that it’s absolutely awe-inspiring.
Since nearly all our cells are regularly replaced, living forever is certainly feasible
You had questions about God and suffering.
How did you find answers?
A couple of Jehovah’s Witnesses called at my home in 1991, and I asked them why we die.
They showed me the Bible’s answer: "Through one man sin entered into the world and death through sin. "
(Romans 5:12) If the first man had not disobeyed God, he would have lived forever.
I immediately realized that this harmonized with what I had learned from my research.
In fact, it’s clear to me that God didn’t intend for people to die.
Since nearly all our cells are regularly replaced, living forever is certainly feasible.
What convinced you that the Bible is God’s Word?
I learned what the Bible says about God at Psalm 139:16: "Your eyes saw even the embryo of me, and in your book all its parts were down in writing. "
As a biochemist, I study the genetic information that is written in our cells.
How did the psalmist know about such writing?
The more I learned from the Bible, the more I was convinced that it is inspired of God.
How were you helped to understand what the Bible teaches?
One of Jehovah’s Witnesses offered to study the Bible with me.
Finally, I learned why God has allowed suffering.
I also learned that, as the Bible states, God purposes to "swallow up death forever. "
(Isaiah 25:8) It will be easy for our Creator to make the marvelous systems of our body operate perfectly so that we can enjoy life without end.
How have you used your knowledge of the Bible to help others?
Well, I became one of Jehovah’s Witnesses in 1995, and since then I have freely shared with others the things I’ve learned from the Bible.
For example, a colleague of mine was devastated when her brother committed suicide.
Her church teaches that God never forgives suicide.
But I showed her how the Bible gives a hope of a resurrection.
(John 5:28, 29) She was deeply comforted to learn that the Creator cares for us.
At such moments, I feel that sharing Bible truths with others brings me more satisfaction than science itself!
A Biochemist Explains His Faith
Dr. Davey Loos is a biochemist in Belgium.
At one time, he doubted the existence of a Creator, believing instead in evolution.
Later, he changed his mind.
What caused a researcher to reconsider his beliefs about the origin of life?
Awake! asked Dr. Loos about his science and his faith.
How did you become involved in scientific research?
When I attended university, I chose to study chemistry.
I was particularly fascinated by proteins and nucleic acids, which are by far the most complex molecules on our planet.
In time, I became intrigued by the way certain molecules respond to sunlight.
Did you believe in God?
I did when I was a little boy.
But later, while I was studying at the Catholic University of Leuven, I was taught that living things owe their designs to natural processes.
The professors made some of these processes sound quite complicated.
They were experienced scientists, so I believed what they said.
Eventually, I found it difficult to accept the existence of God.
What made you reconsider the origin of life?
In 1999, I met a friend from my school days who had become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and I attended one of their meetings.
Also about that time, one of Jehovah’s Witnesses visited our house and left a copy of the book Is There a Creator Who Cares About You?
What did you think about the book?
I was impressed by the quality of the research that it presented.
I began to wonder if evolution really did explain the designs seen in nature.
What designs in nature impressed you?
My work as a biochemist involved studying the design of certain molecules found in ocean-dwelling cyanobacteria, which are microorganisms that don’t depend on other living things for food.
Some researchers think that these organisms were the first living things on our planet.
Using energy from sunlight, the microbes use an extremely complex chemical process, which is still not fully understood, to convert water and carbon dioxide into food.
I was also amazed at how cyanobacteria can harvest light with incredible efficiency.
Leaves also use sunlight to make food.
So, what is remarkable about those bacteria?
The deeper you go in the sea, the less light you find.
So the cyanobacteria that live there must capture every scrap of light energy that comes their way, and they do this by means of highly sophisticated antennae.
The collected energy is transmitted to food-producing centers with nearly 100 percent efficiency.
The design of this light-harvesting machinery has even attracted the interest of solar-panel manufacturers.
Of course, manufactured solar cells are nowhere near as efficient as the systems found in bacteria.
What did that cause you to conclude?
I thought about engineers trying to imitate the marvelous mechanisms found in living things, and I came to the conclusion that life must have been designed by God
I thought about engineers trying to imitate the marvelous mechanisms found in living things, and I came to the conclusion that life must have been designed by God.
But my faith was not based solely on what I studied in science.
It was also based on a careful study of the Bible.
What convinced you that the Bible is from God?
One of the many things that convinced me was the detailed fulfillment of Bible prophecies.
For example, centuries in advance Isaiah described in abundant detail the death and burial of Jesus.
We know this prophecy was written before Jesus’ death because the Isaiah Scroll, found at Qumran, was copied about a hundred years before Jesus was born.
That prophecy says: "He will make his burial place even with the wicked ones, and with the rich class in his death. "
(Isaiah 53:9, 12) Remarkably, Jesus was executed with criminals but was buried in the tomb of a wealthy family.
This is just one example of the many fulfilled prophecies that convinced me that the Bible is inspired of God.
(2 Timothy 3:16) In time, I became one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Why do you enjoy being one of Jehovah’s Witnesses?
Our faith is not blind faith that ignores the facts of science
Our faith is not blind faith that ignores the facts of science.
Also, the principles that guide us are firmly based on the Bible.
As one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, I enjoy sharing the Bible’s comforting message with others and helping them to find answers to their questions.
A Mathematician Explains His Faith
Dr. Gene Hwang, born in 1950 in Tainan, Taiwan, is a retired professor of mathematics at the National Chung Cheng University in Taiwan.
He is also professor emeritus at Cornell University, U.S.A., where he taught and did research in statistics and probability.
For years he was one of the most published authorities on statistics, a field in which he is still involved.
As a young man, he believed that life began by evolutionary processes.
But he later changed his view.
Awake! asked him about his work and religious beliefs.
What teachings were you exposed to as a youth?
My school taught the theory of evolution, but no one explained how life itself began.
When my parents became Taoists, I used to listen to their religious instructors and ask them a lot of questions.
But I received few answers that satisfied me.
Why did you become a mathematician?
When I was in elementary school, I became fascinated with mathematics.
This fascination continued when I went to university, where I especially enjoyed courses in mathematics and probability.
To me, a concise mathematical proof can be both beautiful and elegant.
How did you become interested in the Bible?
In 1978 my wife, Jinghuei, began studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses, and occasionally I shared in the discussions.
By then, we were living in the United States.
Jinghuei had just received her doctorate in physics, and I was studying statistics at Purdue University in Indiana.
What did you think of the Bible?
I was impressed by its account of how the earth was prepared for human life.
The six creative periods described in Genesis, albeit in simple language, seemed to fit the facts​ unlike ancient mythologies.
Still, for many years I did not commit to belief in a Creator.
Why was that an issue for you?
Believing in a Creator meant rejecting my childhood religion
My feelings were involved.
Believing in a Creator meant rejecting my childhood religion, because traditional Taoism does not teach that there is a personal God, or Creator.
Later, though, your viewpoint changed.
Why was that?
The more I thought about the origin of life, the more I became convinced that the first living thing must have been very complex.
For example, it had to be able to reproduce, which requires genetic information and a mechanism for accurately replicating that information.
Also, even the simplest living cell needs molecular machines for building all the parts of a new cell, as well as the means to harness and direct energy.
How could such complex mechanisms assemble randomly from nonliving matter?
As a mathematician, I could not accept that assumption.
It asks far too much of random processes.
What was it that moved you to examine more closely the teachings of Jehovah’s Witnesses?
I had studied with the Witnesses on and off.
Then, in 1995, while visiting Taiwan, I fell sick and needed help.
From the United States, my wife contacted Jehovah’s Witnesses in Taiwan.
They found me exhausted outside a hospital where there were no available beds.
One of the Witnesses took me to a hotel to rest.
He kept checking on me and then took me to a clinic for treatment.
That genuine concern deeply touched me, and I reflected on how often Jehovah’s Witnesses had shown kindness to my family on other occasions.
The Witnesses’ faith made them different.
So I resumed my study of the Bible with them.
The following year I was baptized.
Does your faith conflict with your secular studies?
Not at all!
In recent years I have provided mathematical support for scientists who study gene function.
The study of genetics provides insight into the mechanisms of life​ an insight that fills me with awe for the Creator’s wisdom.
Give an example of that wisdom.
Consider reproduction.
Some organisms, such as amoebas, don’t have male and female counterparts.
These single-cell microbes simply make a copy of their genetic information and divide​ a process called asexual reproduction.
Most animals and plants, however, reproduce sexually, combining genetic information from male and female parents.
Why is sexual reproduction remarkable?
Why would a system of reproduction in which one organism simply divides into two​ and has done this very well for who knows how long ​develop into a system in which two things combine to form one?
The mechanisms required to take half the genetic information from the male and half from the female and combine them are immensely complex, presenting a huge problem to evolutionary biologists.
In my view, gender-based reproduction points unequivocally to the mind of God.
A Classical Pianist Explains His Faith
Eldar Nebolsin of Uzbekistan is an internationally acclaimed pianist.
He has played as a soloist with orchestras in London, Moscow, St. Petersburg, New York, Paris, Rome, Sydney, Tokyo, and Vienna.
Eldar grew up in the Soviet Union as an atheist.
But later he concluded that humans are the work of a loving Creator.
Awake! asked him about his music and his faith.
How did you become a musician?
My parents are both pianists.
They began teaching me when I was five years old.
Later, I studied at the advanced school of music in Tashkent.
Tell us about the challenges of playing with an orchestra.
No two orchestras are alike.
They are like giant musical instruments that are "played " by their conductors.
Perhaps the main challenge for the soloist is to achieve balanced interaction with the conductor.
It’s like a conversation between friends rather than one always taking the lead, each should yield to the other.
Usually, you have only one or two rehearsals in which to develop this rapport.
How much time do you spend practicing?
At least three hours a day and that isn’t just to practice difficult passages.
I also study the structure of the piece I’m preparing but without actually playing it.
Another thing I do is listen to the composer’s other works, which gives me more insight into the present piece.
What would you say distinguishes a fine pianist?
His ability to make a piano "sing. "
Let me explain.
The piano is a kind of percussion instrument.
After a note is struck, the sound can only decrease in volume unlike that of wind instruments or the human voice, which can hold a note or even increase its volume.
The challenge for pianists is to overcome the tendency of a note to fade.
They do this by subtle movement of their fingers and wrists, along with the complex interaction of the right pedal, which extends the duration of a note and varies its timbre.
When pianists master these difficult techniques, they can make the piano sound like a flute, a horn, or even an orchestra.
They can also make it resemble the finest musical instrument of all the human voice.
It’s obvious that you have a deep love for music.
For me, music is the language that most directly expresses and evokes feelings that are difficult, if not impossible, to communicate in words.
What aroused your interest in spiritual matters?
Our house was always full of books, which my father brought from Moscow.
A book that especially interested me contained Bible stories about the dawn of history and the experiences of the Israelites.
Another book I came across was You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Its clear presentation of Bible teachings fascinated me.
When I moved to Spain in 1991 to study music, I took that book with me and read it several times.
I discovered a faith based not merely on emotion but also on sound reasoning and convincing evidence.
A teaching that really intrigued me was the Bible’s promise that humans can live forever on earth.
That made so much sense!
I might add that I still had not met Jehovah’s Witnesses.
But I resolved that when I did meet them, I would ask for Bible lessons.
How did you meet the Witnesses?
A few days after I made that mental resolution, I saw two ladies, each with a Bible in hand.
‘They look like the people I’ve read about in my book,’ I thought.
‘They are preaching just as Christians did in Bible times.’
Soon, I was studying the Bible with a Witness.
Today, my greatest joy is helping others to learn about our Creator.
What convinced you, a former atheist, to believe in a Creator?
Music itself did.
Almost everybody appreciates music, and in a way that no animal can.
Music can express joy, confidence, tenderness, and almost every other emotion.
We naturally move to the rhythms in music.
But is music necessary for our survival?
Does it play a role in the "survival of the fittest, " as evolutionists teach?
I think not.
In my view, it’s unreasonable to conclude that the human brain, with its ability to create and appreciate music like that of Mozart and Beethoven, is the product of evolution.
A far more reasonable explanation is that our brain is the product of a wise and loving Creator.
What led you to believe that the Bible is from God?
The Bible is a collection of 66 smaller books written over some 1,600 years by about 40 men.
I asked myself, ‘Who could have orchestrated the writing of this unified masterpiece?’
The only reasonable answer is God.
In my mind, the Bible is like a symphony with an elegant structure, a masterful arrangement, and a moving message for all mankind.
"I Am Convinced That Life Was Designed by God "
Brett Schenck is a retired environmental consultant in the United States.
He studied the interdependency of plants, animals, and the environment.
Why does he believe in a Creator?
Awake! asked him about his science and his faith.
What is your background?
My father was a mechanical engineer.
He often talked enthusiastically to me about math and science.
As a boy, I was fascinated by the plants and animals in the creeks and pools near my home in New Paris, Ohio, U.S.A. So when I went to Purdue University, I chose to study ecology.
Did religion interest you?
Yes, it did.
Dad encouraged me to study our Lutheran religion.
I studied Koine (common) Greek, one of the languages in which the Bible was first written.
I developed deep respect for the Bible.
How did you view the theory of evolution?
My church accepted it.
My colleagues believed it.
So I never questioned it.
But I also believed in God.
I had a foggy notion that the two beliefs were compatible.
Although I respected the Bible, I didn’t think it came from God.
What made you change your view of the Bible?
Two of Jehovah’s Witnesses, Steve and Sandy, visited my wife, Debbie, and me.
They showed us that the Bible, though not a science textbook, is scientifically accurate.
For example, it says of God: "There is One who is dwelling above the circle of the earth. "
(Isaiah 40:22) It also says: "He is . . . hanging the earth upon nothing. "
(Job 26:7) At that time, I was using satellite photographs to study ecology, so these scriptures impressed me.
They were written long before anyone photographed the circle of the earth hanging on nothing.
As my wife and I studied the Bible with Steve and Sandy, I learned of prophecies that had come true, advice that works, and explanations that satisfied me.
Gradually, I became convinced that the Bible is the Word of God.
When did you change your mind about the origin of life?
Eventually, Steve showed me the Bible’s clear statement: "Jehovah God proceeded to form the man out of dust from the ground. " (Genesis 2:7) The first man has a documented life history.
This raised the question: Is the Bible in harmony with scientific facts?
Steve encouraged me to research the matter, so I did.
What did you learn about evolution?
Many things.
To mention just one, the evolution theory attempts to explain the origin of species.
Living things are made up of efficient organs, such as the heart, lungs, and eyes.
Also, at the microscopic level, we see marvelously designed ‘machines’ within cells.
Where do the designs for those come from?
Evolutionists claim that the best mechanisms are automatically selected because the living things that have them survive better.
But that idea does not answer the question: Where do the mechanisms come from?
I learned that many scientists do not believe that the evolution theory answers that question.
A professor of zoology confided to me that he did not believe any of the theories of evolution.
However, he did not air his views for fear of losing his job.
Does your knowledge of ecology strengthen your faith?
Yes, it does.
My work involved studying how living things depend on each other.
On earth, all living things depend on something else.
Consider flowers and bees, for example.
The color, fragrance, nectar, and structure of flowers are designed to attract bees and to sprinkle them with pollen.
Bees are designed to extract nectar and to take one flower’s pollen to another plant for fertilization.
Clearly, the flowers and bees are designed to supply what the other needs.
‘The resilience of the entire system of life on earth convinces me that life was designed by God’
In an ecosystem, we see interdependence on a vast scale.
An ecosystem is an environment with a community of perhaps thousands of types of animals, plants, bacteria, and fungi.
All animals depend on plants for food and oxygen, and most flowering plants depend on animals.
Although ecosystems are exceedingly complex and the organisms in them are fragile, they may continue surviving for millennia.
Even after damage by pollution, once the source of pollution is gone, a complex ecosystem soon develops again.
When I think about the resilience of the entire system of life on earth, I am convinced that life was designed by God.
Why did you become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses?
I was deeply concerned about the way human society is ruining the environment.
I knew that although ecosystems are resilient, they are not indestructible.
I learned from Jehovah’s Witnesses that, according to the Scriptures, God will "bring to ruin those ruining the earth. "
(Revelation 11:18) Those words were important to me.
As I continued studying the Bible, I gradually realized that the hope that the Bible presents is sure.
I enjoy sharing my beliefs with others, and I have studied the Bible with some scientists.
At age 55, I took early retirement to spend more time helping people to understand the Creator of life and his purpose for our magnificent earth.
The Human Body’s Ability to Repair Wounds
A bandage on a hand
AMONG the numerous mechanisms that make human life possible is the body’s ability to heal wounds and regenerate damaged tissue.
The process begins as soon as an injury occurs.
Consider: The healing process is made possible by a cascade of complex cellular functions:
Platelets adhere to tissues around a wound, forming a blood clot and sealing damaged blood vessels.
Inflammation protects against infection and removes any "debris " caused by the injury.
Within days, the body begins to replace injured tissue, make the wound contract, and repair damaged blood vessels.
Finally, scar tissue remodels and strengthens the damaged area.
Inspired by blood clotting, researchers are developing plastics that can "heal " damage to themselves.
Such regenerating materials are equipped with tiny parallel tubes containing two chemicals that "bleed " when any damage occurs.
As the two chemicals mix, they form a gel that spreads across the damaged areas, closing cracks and holes.
As the gel solidifies, it forms a tough substance that restores the material’s original strength.
One researcher admits that this synthetic healing process currently under development is "reminiscent " of what already exists in nature.
What do you think?
Did the body’s ability to repair wounds come about by evolution?
Or was it designed?
The Storage Capacity of DNA
COMPUTER users generate enormous amounts of digital data that has to be stored for access as needed.
Scientists are hoping to revolutionize current methods for digital storage by imitating a far superior data-storage system found in nature DNA.
Consider: DNA, found in living cells, holds billions of pieces of biological information.
"We can extract it from bones of woolly mammoths . . . and make sense of it, " says Nick Goldman of the European Bioinformatics Institute.
"It’s also incredibly small, dense and does not need any power for storage, so shipping and keeping it is easy. "
Could DNA store man-made data?
Researchers say yes. Scientists have synthesized DNA with encoded text, images, and audio files, much as digital media stores data.
The researchers were later able to decode the stored information with 100 percent accuracy.
Scientists believe that in time, using this method, 0.04 ounce (1 g) of artificial DNA could store the data of some 3,000,000 CDs and that all this information could be preserved for hundreds if not thousands of years.
Potentially, this system could store the whole world’s digital archive.
DNA has thus been dubbed "the ultimate hard drive. "
Could the storage capacity of DNA have come about by evolution?
The Sea Otter’s Fur
MANY aquatic mammals that live in cold waters have a thick layer of blubber under the skin to help them stay warm.
The sea otter relies on another insulation method a thick fur coat.
Consider: The fur of the sea otter is denser than that of any other mammal, with some one million hairs per square inch (155,000 per sq cm).
When the otter swims, its coat traps a layer of air close to its body.
That air acts as an insulator, preventing the cold water from coming into direct contact with the animal’s skin and sapping its body heat.
Scientists believe that there is a lesson to be learned from the sea otter’s fur.
They have experimented with a number of artificial fur coats, varying such factors as hair length and hair spacing.
The researchers have concluded that "the denser and the longer the hairs are, the dryer or the more water-repellent the hairy surface is. "
Put another way, sea otters can boast a truly efficient fur coat.
Researchers hope that their studies will lead to technological advances in the design and production of novel water-repellent textiles.
This may lead some to wonder whether people who have to dive in cold waters may not be better off wearing a hairy wet suit one similar to that of the sea otter!
Did the heat-insulating fur of the sea otter evolve?
The Function of Cat Whiskers
DOMESTIC cats are mostly nocturnal.
Whiskers apparently help them to identify nearby objects and catch prey, particularly after dusk.
Consider: Cats’ whiskers are attached to tissues that have multiple nerve endings.
These nerves are sensitive to even the slightest movement of air.
As a result, cats can detect nearby objects without seeing them obviously an advantage in the dark.
Since whiskers are sensitive to pressure, cats use them to determine the position and movement of an object or of prey.
Whiskers also help cats to measure the width of an opening before they attempt to go through it.
The Encyclopædia Britannica acknowledges that "the functions of the whiskers (vibrissae) are only partially understood; however, it is known that, if they are cut off, the cat is temporarily incapacitated. "
Scientists are designing robots equipped with sensors that mimic cat whiskers to help the robots navigate around obstacles.
These sensors, called e-whiskers, "should have a wide range of applications for advanced robotics, human-machine user interfaces, and biological applications, " says Ali Javey, a faculty scientist at the University of California, Berkeley.
Did the function of cat whiskers come about by evolution?
The Dog’s Sense of Smell
Researchers say that dogs can use their sense of smell to detect the age, gender, and mood of other dogs.
Dogs can even be trained to detect explosives and illegal drugs.
While humans mainly use sight to investigate their surroundings, dogs use their sense of smell.
They "read " with their nose.
Consider: A dog’s sense of smell is thousands of times more refined than ours.
According to the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology, a dog "can detect certain compounds at parts per trillion.
This feat is the equivalent of tasting about a quarter teaspoon of sugar dissolved in an Olympic-sized swimming pool. "
A dog’s nose is wet and is therefore better able to capture scent particles.
A dog’s nose has two airways​ one for breathing, another for smelling.
When a dog sniffs, air is directed to the part of the nasal cavity that contains scent receptors.
A dog’s olfactory region can measure 130 square centimeters (20 sq in.) or more, whereas a human’s measures only 5 square centimeters (0.8 sq in.).
A dog can have up to 50 times as many scent receptor cells as we do.
All of this enables a dog to differentiate between the components of a complex scent.
For example, we can smell soup, but a dog can detect every ingredient in the recipe, according to some experts.
A bowl of soup is superimposed on a man’s head, but every ingredient in the recipe is superimposed on a dog’s head
Researchers at the Pine Street Foundation, a cancer research institute, say that the dog’s brain and nose work together to be "one of the most sophisticated odor detection devices on the planet. "
Scientists are developing electronic "noses " to detect explosives, contraband, and disease, including cancer.
Did the dog’s sense of smell evolve?
The Horse’s Leg
A HORSE (Equus caballus) can gallop at a speed of up to 30 miles per hour (50 km/h).
Although this involves considerable mechanical work, relatively little energy is spent.
How is this possible?
The secret is in the horse’s legs.
Consider what occurs when a horse gallops.
Elastic muscle-tendon units absorb energy when the leg steps onto the ground, and much like a spring, they return it, propelling the horse forward.
Furthermore, at a gallop the horse’s legs vibrate at high frequencies that could injure its tendons.
However, the muscles in the legs act as dampers.
Researchers call this structure a "highly specialized muscle-tendon design " that provides both agility and strength.
Engineers are trying to imitate the design of the horse’s legs for use in four-legged robots.
However, according to the Biomimetic Robotics Laboratory of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the complexity of this design cannot be easily duplicated with current materials and engineering knowledge.
Did the structure of the horse’s legs come about by evolution?
The Glue of the Barnacle
Zoologists have long noted the ability of barnacles to cling tenaciously to rocks, piers, and the hulls of ships.
The glue of the barnacle is said to be far superior to synthetic products.
Just how barnacles adhere to wet surfaces remained a mystery until recently.
Consider: Studies have revealed that a free-swimming barnacle larva examines various surfaces before choosing a suitable anchoring spot.
Once it has found that spot, the larva apparently secretes two substances.
The first is an oily lipid primer that displaces water from the chosen surface.
The primer also creates an environment suitable for the application of the second substance, which is made up of proteins called phosphoproteins.
Together, the two substances form a strong adhesive plaque that even resists degradation by bacteria.
This enduring strength is important because the barnacle will spend the rest of its life anchored to that spot.
Barnacles, with inset showing threads of barnacle glue
The barnacle’s glue-making process is far more complex than previously thought.
A member of the team that discovered the process said: "It’s an incredibly clever natural solution to this problem of how to deal with a water barrier on a surface. "
The findings may help researchers develop glues that can be used under water, as well as synthetic bioadhesives for use in electronics and medical implants.
Is the glue of the barnacle the product of evolution?
The Shape of Seashells
SEASHELLS enable mollusks to live in harsh conditions, resisting tremendous pressures on the seabed.
This ability to provide optimum protection inspired engineers to study the shape and structure of seashells with a view to designing vehicles and buildings that will protect their occupants.
Consider: Engineers analyzed two seashell forms​ bivalve (clamshell-style) and spiral (screw-shaped).
In the case of the bivalve, it was found that the ribbing on the exterior of a shell directed stresses toward its hinge and outer edges.
In contrast, the curving exterior of a spiral shell directed pressure toward its core and wide top.
In both cases, the seashells’ shapes channeled pressure to their strongest areas, meaning that in the event of damage, harm to the mollusk would be less likely.
Researchers also ran comparative stress tests on real shells and on simple hemispheres and cones (produced on a 3-D printer) that mimicked shells’ shapes and composition.
The results showed that natural seashells’ complex surfaces nearly doubled their ability to withstand pressure when compared to the simple shapes.
Commenting on the applications of this research, Scientific American says: "If you wind up driving a shell-shaped car someday, it’ll be both stylish and designed to protect the soft bodies inside. "
What do you think: Did the shape of seashells evolve?
The Byssus of the Marine Mussel
LIKE barnacles, marine mussels attach themselves to rocks, wood, or ship hulls.
However, unlike barnacles, which fasten themselves tightly to a surface, marine mussels dangle by a network of thin filaments called byssus threads.
While this method increases the mussel’s flexibility for feeding and migration, the threads seem too flimsy to withstand the impact of ocean waves.
How does the byssus allow the mussel to hang on and not be swept out to sea?
Consider: Byssus threads are stiff on one end, yet soft and stretchy on the other.
Researchers have found that the precise ratio used by the mussel 80 percent stiff material to 20 percent soft is critical for providing the strongest attachment.
Hence, the byssus can handle the force of dramatic pulling and pushing by marine waters.
Professor Guy Genin calls the results of this research "stunning, " adding: "The magic of this organism lies in the structurally clever integration of this compliant region with the stiff region. "
Scientists believe that the design of the byssus threads could have uses as diverse as attaching equipment to buildings and underwater vessels, connecting tendons to bones, and sealing surgical incisions.
"Nature is a bottomless treasure trove, as far as adhesion strategies go, " says J. Herbert Waite, a professor at the University of California in Santa Barbara, U.S.A.
Did the byssus of the marine mussel come about by evolution?
The Color-Changing Ability of the Cuttlefish
CUTTLEFISH can change their color and camouflage themselves, becoming almost invisible to the human eye.
According to one report, cuttlefish "are known to have a diverse range of body patterns and they can switch between them almost instantaneously. "
How do cuttlefish do it?
Consider: The cuttlefish changes color by using the chromatophore, a special kind of cell found under its skin.
Chromatophores contain sacs that are full of colored pigment and that are surrounded by tiny muscles.
When the cuttlefish needs to camouflage itself, its brain sends a signal to contract the muscles around the sacs.
Then the sacs and the pigment within them expand, and the cuttlefish quickly changes its color and pattern.
The cuttlefish may use this skill not only for camouflage but also to impress potential mates and perhaps communicate.
Engineers at the University of Bristol, England, built an artificial cuttlefish skin.
They sandwiched disks of black rubber between small devices that function like cuttlefish muscles.
When the researchers applied electricity to the skin, the devices flattened and expanded the black disks, darkening and changing the color of the artificial skin.
Research on cuttlefish muscles "the soft structures that nature is so good at making, " according to engineer Jonathan Rossiter could lead to clothing that changes color in a fraction of a second.
Rossiter says that people might wear cuttlefish-inspired clothes for camouflage or simply for fashion.
Did the ability of cuttlefish to change color come about by evolution?
The Light Organ of the Hawaiian Bobtail Squid
A NOCTURNAL hunter, the Hawaiian bobtail squid creates its own light not to be seen, but to be unseen to blend in with the ambient moonlight and starlight.
The animal’s secret is its partnership with light-emitting bacteria.
That partnership may also hold secrets that could benefit us, but in a seemingly unrelated way.
It may benefit our health.
Consider: The Hawaiian bobtail squid lives in the clear coastal waters of the Hawaiian Islands.
Light from the moon and the stars would normally make the silhouette of the creature stand out to predators below.
The bobtail squid, however, emits a glow from its underside that mimics ambient night light in both intensity and wavelength.
The result is stealth no silhouette, no shadow.
The squid’s "high-tech " apparatus is its light organ, which houses bioluminescent bacteria that produce just the right glow to camouflage their host.
The bacteria may also help to regulate the squid’s sleep-wake pattern.
This interests researchers because the bobtail squid may not be the only creature where there is a link between bacteria and circadian cycles, or daily rhythms in activity.
In mammals, for example, bacteria that play a role in digestion may also be associated with circadian rhythms.
Disturbances of these rhythms have been linked to depression, diabetes, obesity, and sleep disorders.
Hence, the study of the squid’s bacteria-host system may furnish insights into human health.
Did the light organ of the Hawaiian bobtail squid come about by evolution?
The Amazing Arm of the Octopus
Robotics engineers are developing equipment to help doctors operate in tight spaces in the body using minimally invasive surgical techniques.
One innovation in this field is inspired by the highly flexible arm, or tentacle, of the octopus.
Consider: The octopus can grab, hold, and squeeze objects with its eight extendable and flexible arms, even in tiny spaces.
Not only can the octopus bend its tentacles in any direction but it can also stiffen different sections of its arms as needed.
Researchers believe that a similarly soft and flexible robotic arm would be invaluable in performing minimally invasive surgery.
This kind of equipment could make it possible to operate on patients who otherwise would have to undergo more complex procedures.
See the flexible tentacles of the octopus in action
Such a robotic arm has already been developed and is being used in simulated operations.
One part of the 135-millimeter (5 in.) arm can manipulate soft internal organs by lifting and holding them without causing any damage to them, while another part performs the actual operation.
According to Dr. Tommaso Ranzani, a member of the team that developed the equipment, "we believe this system will be the start for new and improved versions with more advanced features. "
An octopus and a robotic arm
A soft and flexible robotic arm would be invaluable in surgery
Did the arm of the octopus evolve?
The Flipper of the Humpback Whale
THE adult humpback whale is bigger and heavier than a city bus.
Still, this colossal mammal is remarkably agile when diving and turning.
How can the humpback whale be so nimble?
Part of the secret lies in the bumps on its flippers.
Consider: Most whales and other cetaceans have flippers with smooth leading edges.
However, the humpback whale is different.
It has uniquely large bumps (called tubercles) on the leading edge of its flippers.
As the humpback swims, water flows over the bumps and breaks up into a multitude of vortices.
The bumps channel the water flow and create turbulence.
This "tubercle effect " provides the whale with more lift, allowing it to tilt its flippers at a high angle without stalling.
At high angles these bumps also reduce drag an important benefit for the humpback’s long flippers, each being about one third of the whale’s body length.
Researchers are applying this concept to make more-efficient boat rudders, water turbines, windmills, and helicopter rotor blades.
Did the flipper of the humpback whale come about by evolution?
The Pilot Whale’s Self-Cleaning Skin
Barnacles and other marine organisms that grow on the hulls of ships present a big problem to vessel operators.
Such biofouling, as it is called, slows ships down, causes them to burn more fuel, and requires that they be taken out of service every couple of years to be cleaned.
Scientists are turning to nature for solutions.
Consider: Studies have revealed that the skin of the long-finned pilot whale (Globicephala melas) has self-cleaning abilities.
It is covered with tiny ridges, called nanoridges, which are too small to allow barnacle larvae to get a good grip.
The spaces between these ridges are filled with a gel that attacks algae and bacteria.
The whale secretes fresh gel as it sheds its skin.
Scientists plan to adapt the whale’s self-cleaning system for the hulls of ships.
In the past, antifouling paints were applied.
Yet, the most commonly used of such paints have recently been banned because they are toxic to marine life.
The researchers’ solution is to cover ships’ hulls with a metal mesh over an array of holes that exude a biosafe chemical.
The chemical thickens into a viscous gel on contact with seawater, forming a skin that coats the entire hull.
In time, this skin, about 0.7 millimeters [0.03 in.] thick, wears away, taking with it any organisms that may have been hitching a ride.
The system then secretes a fresh coating of gel to cover the hull.
Barnacles on the hull of a ship
Barnacles slow ships down and are difficult to remove
Laboratory tests have shown that this system could reduce biofouling of ships 100-fold.
And that would be a huge advantage for shipping companies, because bringing a vessel into dry dock for cleaning costs a great deal of money.
Did the pilot whale’s self-cleaning skin evolve?
The Dolphin’s Sonar
Dolphins produce a variety of clicks and whistles and then listen for echoes in order to navigate and explore their environment.
Inspired by the natural sonar of the bottlenose dolphin (Tursiops truncatus), scientists are developing underwater acoustic systems to solve problems that lie beyond the capabilities of existing technology.
Consider: The dolphin’s sonar allows it to find fish hiding in sand on the seabed and to distinguish between a fish and a rock.
According to Keith Brown, an associate professor at Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, Scotland, the dolphin can also "tell the difference between containers that hold fresh water, salt water, syrup, and oil from [a distance of] ten meters [32.8 ft]. "
Scientists would like to develop devices having some of the same abilities.
A dolphin uses its sonar to detect the contents of a container
From a distance of ten meters, dolphins can tell containers apart by their contents
Researchers analyzed the dolphins’ vocalizations and hearing and attempted to replicate them.
The result was a sonar device packed with sophisticated electronics and fitted into a cylinder less than one meter (3.3 ft) long.
The device, which is attached to an underwater robotic vehicle that resembles a torpedo, was designed to inspect the seabed, find buried items such as cables or pipelines, and analyze them without making direct contact.
Its developers foresee applications in the oil and gas industry.
The dolphin-inspired sonar should enhance the range of data that can be collected by current sonar devices, helping technicians to place underwater equipment in the best location, detect any damage to it​ such as hairline cracks in oil-rig support legs​ and even find blockages in pipelines.
Did the bottlenose dolphin’s sonar come about by evolution?
The "Seeing " Skeleton of the Brittle Star
THE reef-dwelling brittle star has an amazing form of armor on its upper surface.
This part of its skeleton is studded with microscopic lenses that turn the animal’s armor into a compound eye.
Crystalline bumps on the skeleton serve as high-quality microlenses
Consider: When scientists examined the skeletal plates of the brittle star, they saw "an unusual pattern of densely packed, crystal-clear bumps, each thinner than a human hair, " says the magazine Natural History.
These crystalline bumps, made of calcium carbonate (calcite), proved to be high-quality microlenses that focus light onto what seem to be photosensitive nerves just below the plates.
Moreover, the lenses have the exact shape needed to produce the desired image.
According to chemist Joanna Aizenberg, the brittle star’s dual-purpose shell "demonstrates an important principle: in biology, materials are often optimized for multiple functions. "
Taking a lesson from the biology of the brittle star, researchers have devised a simple, low-cost method of producing arrays of microlenses made of calcium carbonate.
The many applications of these arrays include telecommunications, where they are used to conduct light signals through optical fibers.
Did the "seeing " skeleton of the brittle star come about by evolution?
Microorganisms That Break Down Oil
IN 2010, almost five million barrels (800 million L) of crude oil leaked into the Gulf of Mexico after a drilling rig exploded and sank.
Yet, within months much of the contamination had disappeared.
How was that possible?
Microbes that break down oil
Consider: Scientific research has shown that an array of marine bacteria can break down the long-chain carbon molecules present in oil.
Professor Terry Hazen, an environmental microbiologist, described these organisms as "oil-seeking missiles. "
Such organisms were partly responsible for what took place in the Gulf of Mexico, as described at the outset.
"In a sense, it is no surprise that the seas should host oil-hungry microbes, " says a BBC report on the topic.
After all, "natural seeps from the ocean floor have been releasing oil into the world’s waters " for aeons.
Granted, human efforts in cleaning oil spills are productive.
Yet, man’s best efforts to clean up oil spills may do more harm than good.
Chemical dispersants interfere with natural processes that break down oil.
Added to that, such chemicals are toxic and have lasting ill effects on the environment.
But nature’s oil-decomposing capacity, including oil-hungry microbes, enables the sea to activate a self-cleansing process without the negative side effects of artificial methods.
Did the oil-devouring property of marine microorganisms come about by chance?
The Upturned Wing Tip of Soaring Birds
A JET plane in flight creates rapidly spiraling swirls of air at the tips of its wings.
These vortices cause drag, increasing fuel consumption.
They also buffet planes that may be following closely.
Thus, flights departing from the same runway must be sufficiently spaced to allow time for the vortices to dissipate.
Airplane engineers have discovered a way to reduce these problems.
Their solution?
Winglets, inspired by the upturned wing-tip feathers of soaring birds, such as buzzards, eagles, and storks.
An airplane winglet
Consider: During flight, the feathers on the wing tips of those large birds bend upward until they are almost vertical.
This configuration balances maximum lift with minimum wing length.
It also improves performance.
Engineers have designed airplane wings with a similar shape.
Using innovative wind-tunnel testing, they found that if the modified wings were precisely curved at the tip and properly aligned with the airflow, they improved aircraft performance nowadays by up to 10 percent or more.
The reason?
Winglets minimize drag by reducing the size of the vortices.
Moreover, winglets also create a form of thrust that "counteracts some of the normal drag of the airplane, " says the Encyclopedia of Flight.
Winglets thus enable airplanes to fly farther, carry a greater load, have shorter wings which also facilitates parking and save fuel.
In 2010, for example, airlines "saved 2 billion gallons [7,600 million L] of jet fuel worldwide " and contributed to large reductions in aircraft emissions, says a NASA news release.
Did the upturned wing tip of soaring birds come about by evolution?
The Emperor Penguin’s Feather Coat
THE emperor penguin can jet through the water and leap onto an ice shelf at an amazing speed. How?
Emperor penguin feather
Consider: The emperor penguin traps air in its feathers.
Not only does this insulate the bird against extreme cold but it also enables it to move two or three times faster than it otherwise could.
How? Marine biologists have suggested that it does so by releasing tiny air bubbles from between its feathers.
As these bubbles are released, they reduce friction on the surface of the penguin’s plumage, enabling the bird to accelerate.
Interestingly, engineers have been studying ways to make ships go faster by using bubbles to reduce friction against their hulls.
However, researchers acknowledge that further investigation is challenging because "the complexity of penguin plumage would be difficult to replicate in a man-made porous membrane or mesh. "
Did the emperor penguin’s feather coat come about by evolution?
The Energy-Efficient Flight of the Wandering Albatross
BIRDS that soar can stay airborne with minimum effort.
The wandering albatross is an outstanding example.
With a wingspan of 11 feet (3.4 m) and weighing nearly 20 pounds (8.5 kg), this bird can fly thousands of miles using very little energy!
Its secret lies in both its anatomy and its soaring technique.
Consider: During flight, an albatross engages special tendons that lock its wings in place when fully extended, thus allowing the muscles to rest.
The bird’s other secret how it soars hour after hour involves its mastery of oceanic winds.
At sea, albatrosses climb, turn, and descend in continually repeated arcs a maneuver that gives the birds enough momentum to compensate for that lost through drag.
Only recently did scientists figure out how the birds are able to do this.
Using high-resolution tracking devices and special computer software, they found that albatrosses gain the needed energy when they wheel from windward (into the wind) to leeward in the upper part of the flight curve.
"The extraction of energy " is "smooth and continuous, " state the scientists.
The result?
The bird can soar for hours on end without a single flap of its wings!
These insights may help engineers design aerial vehicles that are more fuel efficient, perhaps even using engineless propulsion.
Did the energy-efficient flight of the albatross, as well as its specialized anatomy, come about by evolution?
The Bar-Tailed Godwit’s Navigational System
THE bar-tailed godwit makes one of the most amazing migrations known to man.
The bird’s 7,000-mile (11,000 km) journey can take more than eight days.
Consider: Researchers speculate that some types of birds use the earth’s magnetic field for navigation, as if they had a compass built into their brain.
It is possible that the godwit additionally navigates by means of the sun by day and the stars by night.
It seems that the godwit can also sense upcoming storm systems that could allow it to benefit from tailwinds.
Still, the details of just how these birds make their incredible journey baffle experts.
"I’ve been studying them 20 years, " says biologist Bob Gill, "and it’s still jaw-dropping to me. "
What Do You Think?
Did the navigational system of the bar-tailed godwit come about by evolution?
The Thorny Devil Lizard’s Moisture-Extracting Skin
THE Australian thorny devil lizard (Moloch horridus) extracts moisture from fog, humidity, and wet sand.
Then it channels the water to its mouth for drinking.
How?
The answer may lie in the lizard’s amazing skin.
Sketches that show grooves on the surface of the thorny devil lizard’s skin
Grooves on the surface of the skin are connected to a network of channels below the skin so that water is directed to the sides of the thorny devil’s mouth
Consider: The thorny devil’s skin is overlaid with scales.
Some scientists think that moisture or dew collected on the scales runs down to the rough surface of the skin and enters the skin’s network of half-open channels, or grooves, located between the scales.
These channels are interconnected and lead to the sides of the thorny devil’s mouth.
But how does this lizard draw up water up its legs, across its body, and into its mouth defying gravity in the process?
And how does the thorny devil extract moisture from wet surfaces by rubbing its belly against them?
Researchers have apparently unveiled the thorny devil’s secret.
The channels on the surface of the skin are connected by way of ducts to another network of channels below, that is, within the lizard’s skin.
The structure of these channels enables capillary action a phenomenon in which water is drawn into narrow spaces even against the force of gravity.
The lizard’s skin thus acts as a sponge.
Janine Benyus, president of the Biomimicry Institute, says that mimicking moisture-extracting technologies may help engineers design a system to remove humidity from air in order to cool buildings more efficiently and also to obtain drinking water.
Did the moisture-extracting skin of the thorny devil come about by evolution?
The Tail of the Agama Lizard
THE agama jumps from a horizontal surface onto a vertical wall with ease.
But if that surface is slippery, the lizard loses its footing, yet it still makes a successful landing on the wall.
How?
The secret is in the lizard’s tail.
Consider: When agamas jump from a coarse surface which provides grip they first stabilize their body and keep their tail downward.
This helps them to jump at the correct angle.
When on a slippery surface, though, the lizards tend to stumble and jump at the wrong angle.
However, in midair, they correct the angle of their body by flicking their tail upward.
The process is intricate.
"Lizards must actively adjust the angle of their tails just right to remain upright, " says a report released by the University of California, Berkeley.
The more slippery the platform, the more the lizard must raise its tail to ensure a safe landing.
The agama’s tail may help engineers design more-agile robotic vehicles that can be used to search for survivors in the aftermath of an earthquake or other catastrophe.
"Robots are not nearly as agile as animals, " says researcher Thomas Libby, "so anything that can make a robot more stable is an advancement. "
Did the agama’s tail come about by evolution?
The Crocodile’s Jaw
THE crocodile has the most powerful bite ever measured for animals that are now living.
For example, the saltwater crocodile, found near Australia, can bite nearly three times as hard as a lion or a tiger.
Yet, the crocodile’s jaw is also incredibly sensitive to touch even more sensitive than the human fingertip.
How can that be, considering the crocodile’s armored skin?
The crocodile’s jaw is covered with thousands of sense organs.
After studying them, researcher Duncan Leitch noted: "Each of the nerve endings comes out of a hole in the skull. "
This arrangement protects the nerve fibers in the jaw while providing sensitivity that in some spots is greater than instruments could measure.
As a result, the crocodile can distinguish between food and debris in its mouth.
That is also how a mother crocodile can carry her hatchlings in her mouth without accidentally crushing them.
The crocodile’s jaw is a surprising combination of power and sensitivity.
Did the crocodile’s jaw come about by evolution?
The Gastric Brooding Frog’s Reproductive System
THE Australian gastric brooding frog, thought to be extinct since 2002, had a bizarre means of reproduction.
The female swallowed her fertilized eggs and incubated her young in her stomach for about six weeks.
Her babies later emerged from her mouth as fully developed frogs.
To keep from digesting her eggs, it was necessary that the mother frog not only stop eating but also stop producing stomach acid.
Evidently, chemicals released by the eggs and hatchlings inhibited the production of acid.
The mother would brood about two dozen eggs.
By the time she gave birth, her young could make up almost 40 percent of her total body weight.
This would be like a woman who weighed 150 pounds (68 kg) before she became pregnant carrying 24 babies weighing four pounds (1.8 kg) each!
The young frogs stretched the mother’s stomach to the point that it completely compressed her lungs, forcing her to breathe through her skin.
The baby frogs would normally emerge over a period of days as they became ready.
If the mother sensed danger, though, she would give birth by vomiting them out.
Researchers once observed a female expel six young frogs together, shooting them about 40 inches (1 m) in the air.
If, as some claim, its reproductive system evolved, the gastric brooding frog would have had to make vast changes to both its physical makeup and its behavior all at once.
"It is inconceivable to contemplate a slow and progressive change in its reproductive biology, " wrote scientist and evolutionist Michael J. Tyler.
"The habit is totally effective or it fails completely. "
The only plausible explanation, Tyler says, is "a single, huge, quantum step. "
Some would say that such a quantum step is called creation.
Did the reproductive system of the gastric brooding frog come about by evolution?
Snake Skin
BECAUSE they move without limbs, snakes need robust skin that can withstand constant friction.
Some species climb up rough tree trunks, while others burrow into abrasive sand.
What makes the skin of a snake so durable?
Consider: The skin of snakes can differ in thickness and structure from one species to another.
However, the skin of all snakes has one thing in common: It is firm on the outside and becomes progressively softer toward the inside.
Why is this advantageous?
"Material that has a transition from a stiff outside to a flexible inside can distribute an impacting force over a larger area, " says researcher Marie-Christin Klein.
The unique structure of snake skin allows sufficient traction between body and ground for the snake to be able to move, and at the same time, it evenly distributes pressure from sharp-edged stones so that there is less damage to the skin.
Durability is vital, since snakes usually shed their skin only every two to three months.
Materials with the properties of snake skin may be useful in the field of medicine for example, in manufacturing slip-resistant and extra-durable artificial implants.
Also, drive and conveyor machinery that mimics the construction of snake skin may require fewer pollutive lubricants.
Did snake skin come about by evolution?
The Landing Strategy of the Honeybee
HONEYBEES can safely land at virtually any angle without problems.
How do they do it?
Consider: A safe landing requires that the honeybee reduce its approach speed to nearly zero before contact.
One logical way to do this would be to measure two factors flight speed and the distance to the target and then reduce speed accordingly.
However, that method would be difficult for most insects because they have close-set, fixed-focus eyes that cannot directly measure distance.
The vision of honeybees is very different from that of humans who use binocular vision.
Honeybees seem to use the simple fact that an object appears to get bigger as they approach it.
The closer they get to an object, the faster it seems to increase in size.
Experiments conducted at the Australian National University indicate that the honeybee decreases its flight speed so that the rate of apparent enlargement of an object remains constant.
By the time the honeybee reaches its target, its speed has decreased to almost zero, allowing it to land safely.
The journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences reports: "The simplicity and generality of this landing strategy . . . [make] it ideal for implementation in the guidance systems of flying robots. "
Did the honeybee’s landing strategy evolve?
The Honeycomb
HONEYBEES (Apis mellifera) construct their honeycombs with wax secreted from glands found on the underside of their abdomen.
The honeycomb is regarded as an engineering marvel.
Consider: For centuries, mathematicians suspected that partitions in the shape of hexagons were better than equilateral triangles or squares​ or any other shape ​for maximizing space with the least amount of building material.
But they could not fully explain why.
In 1999, Professor Thomas C. Hales provided mathematical proof for the advantage of what he termed "honeycomb conjecture. "
He demonstrated that regular hexagons are the best way to divide a space into equal parts with minimal structural support.
By using hexagonal cells, bees can make the best use of all the space available to them, produce a light but sturdy honeycomb with a minimum amount of wax, and store the maximum amount of honey in a given space.
Not surprisingly, the honeycomb has been described as "an architectural masterpiece. "
Today, scientists mimic the bees’ honeycomb to create structures that are both resilient and space efficient.
Aircraft engineers, for example, use panels patterned after the honeycomb to build planes that are stronger and lighter and thus use less fuel.
Did the superior structure of the honeycomb come about by evolution?
The Ant’s Neck
An ant carries foliage in its mouth
MECHANICAL ENGINEERS marvel at the ability of a common ant to lift weights many times heavier than its own body.
To understand this ability, engineers at Ohio State University, U.S.A., reverse engineered some of the ant’s anatomy, physical properties, and mechanical functions by means of computer models.
The models were created using X-ray cross-sectional images (micro CT scans) and simulations of the forces an ant generates when carrying loads.
A critical part of the ant’s anatomy is its neck, which has to bear the full weight of loads grasped in its mouth.
Soft tissues within the ant’s neck bind with the stiff exoskeleton of its thorax (body) and head in a manner that mimics the interlocking of fingers in folded hands.
"The design and structure of this interface is critical for the performance of the neck joint, " says one of the researchers.
"The unique interface between hard and soft materials likely strengthens the adhesion and may be a key structural design feature that enables the large load capacity of the neck joint. "
Researchers hope that a clear grasp of how the ant’s neck functions will contribute to advancements in the design of man-made robotic mechanisms.
Did the ant’s neck with its complex and highly integrated mechanical systems evolve?
Or was it designed?
The Untold Story of Creation
BILLIONS of people have read or heard what the Bible says about the beginning of the universe.
The 3,500-year-old account starts with the well-known statement: "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. "
Many people, however, are unaware of the fact that Christendom’s leaders, including so-called creationists and fundamentalists, have spun the Bible account of creation into numerous tales that deviate from what the Bible really says.
These interpretations fly in the face of scientific fact.
Even though those tales are not found in the Bible, they have caused some people to dismiss the Bible account as mythical allegory.
The real Bible story of creation has gone largely unnoticed.
This is a shame, for the Bible actually presents a very logical and credible explanation of the beginning of the universe.
What is more, that explanation harmonizes with scientific discovery.
Yes, you might be pleasantly surprised by the Bible’s untold story of creation!
THE UNCREATED CREATOR
Infinity
The Bible account of creation hinges on the fact that there is a Supreme Being, Almighty God, who created all things.
Who is he, and what is his nature?
The Bible reveals that he is quite different from the deities found in popular culture and mainstream religion.
He is the Creator of all things, but most people know very little about him.
God is a person, an individual.
He is not a vague force devoid of personality, floating aimlessly throughout the universe.
He has thoughts, feelings, and goals.
God has infinite power and wisdom.
This explains the complex design found everywhere in creation, especially in living things.
God created all physical matter.
Hence, he cannot be made of physical elements that he himself has created.
Rather, he is of a spiritual, or nonphysical, nature.
God’s existence is not limited by time.
He has always existed and will always exist.
Hence, no one created him.
God has a personal name, which is used thousands of times in the Bible.
That name is Jehovah.
Jehovah God loves and cares for humans.
HOW LONG DID GOD TAKE TO CREATE THE UNIVERSE?
Face of a clock
The Bible states that God created "the heavens and the earth. "
This broad statement, however, makes no reference to the length of time involved in creating the universe or to the methods he used to shape it.
What about the widespread creationist belief that God created the universe in six literal 24-hour days?
This concept, widely rejected by scientists, is based on a gross misunderstanding of the Bible account.
Consider what the Bible really says.
The Bible does not support fundamentalists and creationists who claim that the creative days were literal 24-hour days
The Bible does not support fundamentalists and creationists who claim that the creative days were literal 24-hour days.
The Bible frequently uses the term "day " to designate various periods of time.
In some cases these periods are of an unspecified length.
The account of creation found in the Bible book of Genesis is one example of this.
In the Bible account, each of the six creative days could have lasted for thousands of years.
God had already created the universe, including a lifeless planet Earth, by the time the first creative day began.
Evidently the six creative days were long periods during which Jehovah God prepared the earth for human habitation.
The Bible account of creation does not conflict with scientific conclusions about the age of the universe.
DID GOD USE EVOLUTION?
Theoretical process of evolution
Many who do not believe in the Bible embrace the theory that living things emerged from lifeless chemicals through unknown and mindless processes.
Supposedly, at some point a bacteria-like, self-replicating organism arose, gradually branching out into all the species that exist today.
This would imply that ultimately the mind-bogglingly complex human actually evolved from bacteria.
The theory of evolution is also embraced by many who claim to accept the Bible as the word of God.
They believe that God produced the first burst of life on earth but then simply monitored, and perhaps steered, the process of evolution.
That, however, is not what the Bible says.
The Bible account of creation does not conflict with the scientific observation that variations occur within a kind
According to the Bible, Jehovah God created all the basic kinds of plant and animal life, as well as a perfect man and woman who were capable of self-awareness, love, wisdom, and justice.
The kinds of animals and plants created by God have obviously undergone changes and have produced variations within the kinds.
In many cases, the resulting life-forms are remarkably different from one another.
The Bible account of creation does not conflict with the scientific observation that variations occur within a kind.
A CREATOR PERCEIVED IN CREATION
In the mid-1800’s, British biologist Alfred Russel Wallace agreed with Charles Darwin on the theory of evolution by natural selection.
But even this renowned evolutionist is said to have stated: "For those who have eyes to see and minds accustomed to reflect, in the minutest cells, in the blood, in the whole earth, and throughout the stellar universe . . . , there is intelligent and conscious direction; in a word, there is Mind. "
Almost two thousand years before Wallace, the Bible had already observed: "For [God’s] invisible qualities are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward, because they are perceived by the things made, even his eternal power and Godship. "
(Romans 1:20) From time to time, you might want to take a moment to reflect on the marvelous complexities found in nature from a single blade of grass to the countless heavenly bodies.
By examining creation you can perceive the Creator.
‘But if there is a loving God who created all things,’ you may ask, ‘why would he permit suffering?
Has he abandoned his earthly creation?
What does the future hold?’
The Bible contains many other untold stories truths that have been buried under human ideas and religious agendas and, therefore, hidden from most people.
The publishers of this magazine, Jehovah’s Witnesses, would be happy to help you examine unadulterated Bible truth and learn more about the Creator and the future of his human creation.
THE TIME LINE OF CREATION
THE BEGINNING
The material heavens and earth are created.
Genesis 1:1.
Earth formless and dark
DARKNESS
The earth is formless, desolate, and dark.
Genesis 1:2.
Day 1: light; day and night
FIRST DAY
Diffused light evidently penetrates the earth’s atmosphere.
If there had been any observer on the surface of the earth, the sources of light would have been imperceptible to him.
Yet, the difference between night and day became discernible.
Genesis 1:3-5.
Day 2: expanse
SECOND DAY
The earth is covered with water and a dense mantle of vapor.
These two elements are separated, creating a gap between the watery surface and the canopy of vapor.
The Bible describes this space as "an expanse between the waters, " and calls it "Heaven. " Genesis 1:6-8.
Day 3: dry land and vegetation
THIRD DAY
Surface water subsides and dry ground appears.
The atmosphere clears up to allow more sunlight to reach the ground.
Some vegetation appears, with new species sprouting through the third and subsequent creative days.
Genesis 1:9-13.
Day 4: heavenly luminaries
FOURTH DAY
The sun and moon become discernible from the earth’s surface.
Genesis 1:14-19.
Day 5: fish and birds
FIFTH DAY
God creates underwater creatures and flying creatures in great numbers with the ability to procreate within their kinds.
Genesis 1:20-23.
Day 6: land animals and humans
SIXTH DAY
Land animals are created, both large and small.
The sixth day culminates with a masterpiece of God’s physical creation: the first human couple.
Genesis 1:24-31.
Did God Use Evolution to Create the Different Types of Life?
The Bible clearly states that God created humans as well as different "kinds " of animal and plant life.
(Genesis 1:12, 21, 25, 27; Revelation 4:11) It says that the entire human family descended from Adam and Eve, our first parents.
(Genesis 3:20; 4:1) The Bible account does not support the theory that God used evolution to bring about the different kinds of life, sometimes called theistic evolution.
The fact is, though, that nothing in the Bible conflicts with scientific observations that variations occur within each kind of life.
Did God use evolution?
Is evolution compatible with the Bible?
What about the ability of plants and animals to adapt?
Did God use evolution? The term "theistic evolution " refers to a broad variety of ideas.
According to the Encyclopædia Britannica, the term promotes the idea that "natural selection is one of the mechanisms with which God directs the natural world. "
Theistic evolution can also include the following ideas:
All living organisms descended from common ancestors in the distant past.
One kind of life-form can evolve into a completely different kind of life-form, a concept that is sometimes referred to as macroevolution.
God is somehow ultimately responsible for these processes.
Theistic evolution implies that the Bible’s account of creation in Genesis is not completely accurate.
However, Jesus referred to the Genesis account as historical fact.
(Genesis 1:26, 27; 2:18-24; Matthew 19:4-6) The Bible says that before coming to earth, Jesus lived in heaven with God and was involved in helping God to bring "all things " into existence.
(John 1:3) Therefore, the idea that God used evolution to bring about different life-forms is incompatible with Bible teachings.
What about the ability of plants and animals to adapt?
The Bible does not explain how much variation can occur within a kind.
Neither does it contradict the fact that the different kinds of animals and plants created by God can vary as they breed or adapt to new environments.
Although some view such adaptations as a form of evolution, no new kind of life is produced.
Creation
Did God create the earth in just six 24-hour days, as some creationists claim?
"In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. " Genesis 1:1.
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS
God created the universe, including the earth, in the indefinite past "in the beginning, " as Genesis 1:1 says.
Modern science agrees that the universe had a beginning.
A recent scientific model suggests it to be almost 14 billion years old.
The Bible also describes six "days " of creation.
However, it does not say that these were 24-hour days.
(Genesis 1:31) In fact, the Bible uses the word "day " to refer to various lengths of time.
For example, it calls the entire period of creation "the day that Jehovah God made earth and heaven. " (Genesis 2:4) Evidently, these "days " of creation lasted many thousands of years.
Psalm 90:4.
WHY IT MATTERS
The false ideas of creationists could lead you to dismiss the Bible altogether.
On the other hand, if the Bible actually contains a credible account of creation, you stand to benefit from its storehouse of "practical wisdom. "
Proverbs 3:21.
Did God use evolution to create life on earth?
"God said: ‘Let the earth bring forth living creatures according to their kinds.’ " Genesis 1:24.
Instead, he created basic "kinds " of complex plants and animals, which then reproduced "according to their kinds. "
(Genesis 1:11, 21, 24) This process, which continues today, has resulted in the earth being filled with the same "kinds " of life that God originally created.
Psalm 89:11.
The Bible does not specify how much variation can occur within a kind, as might result when animals within a kind interbreed and adapt to their environment.
While some view such adaptations as a form of evolution, no new kind of life is produced.
Modern research supports the idea that the basic categories of plants and animals have changed little over vast periods of time.
The Bible’s scientific accuracy in describing basic "kinds " of life strengthens its credibility in other areas, including history and prophecy.
Where did the raw material of the universe come from?
"I stretched out the heavens with my own hands. "
Isaiah 45:12.
God is the Source of infinite power, or energy.
(Job 37:23) This is significant, because scientists have learned that energy can be converted into matter.
The Bible says that God himself is the Source of the "vast dynamic energy " that produced the universe.
(Isaiah 40:26) God promises to use his power to sustain his creation, for the Bible says regarding the sun, moon, and stars: "[God] keeps them established forever and ever. "
Psalm 148:3-6.
The astronomer Allan Sandage once said: "Science cannot answer the deepest questions.
As soon as you ask why is there something instead of nothing, you have gone beyond science. "
Not only does the Bible explain creation in a way that harmonizes with science but it also answers questions that science cannot such as, What is God’s purpose for the earth and for mankind?
The Wonder Element
Carbon atoms
"No element is more essential to life than carbon, " says the book Nature’s Building Blocks.
The unique characteristics of carbon enable it to bond with itself and many other chemical elements, thus forming millions of compounds, more of which are constantly being discovered or synthesized.
As the examples here show, carbon atoms can also combine to form various shapes, including chains, pyramids, rings, sheets, and tubes.
Carbon truly is a wonder element!
DIAMOND
A diamond
Carbon atoms form pyramids, called tetrahedrons, making the structure extremely rigid and making diamond the hardest naturally occurring substance known.
A perfect diamond is essentially a single molecule of carbon atoms.
GRAPHITE
A lead pencil
Tightly bonded carbon atoms are set out in loosely bonded layers that can slide away from one another like sheets of paper on a stack.
Because of these characteristics, graphite is both a fine lubricant and a key compound in lead pencils.
GRAPHENE
A pencil trace
This refers to a single layer of carbon atoms arranged in a hexagonal mesh, or lattice.
Graphene has a tensile strength many times that of steel.
A pencil trace may have small amounts of graphene in single or multiple layers.
FULLERENES
Fullerenes
These hollow molecules of carbon come in shapes that include microscopic balls and tubes called nanotubes.
They are measured in nanometers, or billionths of a meter.
LIVING ORGANISMS
Living cells that contain carbon
The many cells that make up plants, animals, and humans are built on a framework of carbon​ an element found in carbohydrates, fats, and amino acids.
"[God’s] invisible qualities . . . are perceived by the things made. "​ Romans 1:20.
A star
Carbon​ A Product of Ultrafine Tuning in the Stars
Carbon is formed by the fusion of three helium nuclei, which scientists believe occurs inside stars called red giants.
For the helium to combine, however, certain conditions must be exactly right.
"Change just a few of the settings [of physical laws] even an infinitesimal amount, " wrote physicist Paul Davies, and "we’d have no universe, no life and certainly no humans. "
How can we account for such ultrafine tuning?
Some say it just happened.
Others see it as evidence of a wise Creator.
Which view do you consider more reasonable?
Your Cells Living Libraries!
IN 1953, molecular biologists James Watson and Francis Crick published a discovery that was critical to our scientific understanding of life.
They had discovered the double-helical structure of DNA.
This threadlike substance mostly found in the nucleus of cells contains encoded, or "written, " information, making cells living libraries, as it were.
This amazing discovery opened up a new era in biology!
But what purpose is served by the "writing " in cells?
More intriguing, how did it get there?
WHY CELLS NEED INFORMATION
Have you ever wondered how a seed becomes a tree or how a fertilized egg becomes a human?
Have you ever wondered how you inherited your traits?
The answers involve the information found in DNA.
DNA molecule, resembling long twisted ladder with rungs
Nearly all cells have DNA, complex molecules that resemble long twisted ladders.
In the human genome, or our complete set of DNA, the ladders have approximately three billion chemical "rungs. "
Scientists call these rungs base pairs because each rung is made up of two chemical substances, of which there are four altogether.
Using the first letter of each, these substances are abbreviated A, C, G, and T a simple, four-letter alphabet, as it were.
In 1957, Crick proposed that it is the linear sequence of the chemical rungs that forms coded instructions.
In the 1960’s, that code began to be understood.
Information, whether in the form of pictures, sounds, or words, can be stored and processed in many ways.
Computers, for example, do this all digitally.
Living cells store and process information chemically, DNA being the key compound.
DNA is passed on when cells divide and organisms reproduce abilities that are considered defining characteristics of life.
How do cells use information?
Think of DNA as a collection of recipes, each one involving step-by-step processes, with each step carefully scripted in precise terms.
But instead of the end result being a cake or a cookie, it might be a cabbage or a cow.
In living cells, of course, the processes are fully automated, adding yet another layer of complexity and sophistication.
The information in a bacterial cell would fill a 1,000-page book
Genetic information is stored until it is needed, perhaps to replace worn out or diseased cells with healthy new ones or to pass on traits to offspring.
How much information does DNA hold?
Consider one of the smallest organisms, bacteria.
German scientist Bernd-Olaf Küppers stated: "Carried over to the realm of human language, the molecular text describing the construction of a bacterial cell would be about the size of a thousand-page book. "
For good reason, chemistry professor David Deamer wrote: "One is struck by the complexity of even the simplest form of life. "
How does the genome of a human compare?
"[It] would fill a library of several thousand volumes, " says Küppers.
DNA Key Dates
1869 Chemist Friedrich Miescher identified what we now call deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA.
Early 1900’s Biochemist Phoebus Levene discovered the order of certain chemical components of DNA and how these combine to form a chainlike molecule.
1950 Biochemist Erwin Chargaff discovered that the composition of DNA varies among species.
1953 Scientists James Watson and Francis Crick described the double-helical structure of DNA.
"WRITTEN IN A WAY THAT WE CAN UNDERSTAND "
To describe the writing in DNA as "molecular-genetic language " is more than "mere metaphor, " says Küppers.
"Like human language, " he points out, "the molecular-genetic language also possesses a syntactic dimension. "
Put simply, DNA has a "grammar, " or set of rules, that strictly regulates how its instructions are composed and carried out.
The "words " and "sentences " in DNA make up the various "recipes " that direct the production of proteins and other substances that form the building blocks of the various cells that make up the body.
For example, the "recipe " might guide the production of bone cells, muscle cells, nerve cells, or skin cells.
"The filament of DNA is information, a message written in a code of chemicals, one chemical for each letter, " wrote evolutionist Matt Ridley.
"It is almost too good to be true, but the code turns out to be written in a way that we can understand. "
The Bible writer David said in prayer to God: "Your eyes even saw me as an embryo; all its parts were written in your book. "
(Psalm 139:16) Of course, David was using poetic language.
Nevertheless, in principle, he was right on the mark, which is typical of the Bible writers.
None were even slightly influenced by the fanciful folklore or mythology of other ancient peoples.
2 Samuel 23:1, 2; 2 Timothy 3:16.
Parents with their little girl
How does a child inherit traits from its parents?
HOW DID THE WRITING GET THERE?
As is often the case, when scientists explain one mystery, they open a door to another.
That was true regarding the discovery of DNA.
When it was understood that DNA contains coded information, thoughtful people asked, ‘How did the information get there?’
Of course, no human observed the formation of the first DNA molecule.
So we have to draw our own conclusions.
Even so, these conclusions need not be speculative.
Consider the following comparisons.
In 1999, fragments of very ancient pottery with unusual markings, or symbols, were found in Pakistan.
The marks still remain undeciphered.
Nevertheless, they are considered man-made.
A few years after Watson and Crick discovered the structure of DNA, two physicists proposed searching for coded radio signals from space.
Thus began the modern-day search for extraterrestrial intelligence.
The point?
People attribute information to intelligence, whether that information is in the form of symbols on clay or signals from space.
They do not need to see the information being created to draw that conclusion.
Yet, when the most sophisticated code known to man the chemical code of life was discovered, many shoved that logic aside, attributing DNA to mindless processes.
Is that reasonable?
Is it consistent?
Is it scientific?
A number of respected scientists say no.
These include Dr. Gene Hwang and Professor Yan-Der Hsuuw.
Consider what they say.
Dr. Gene Hwang studies the mathematical basis of genetics.
At one time he believed in evolution, but his research changed his view.
"The study of genetics, " he told Awake! "provides insight into the mechanisms of life an insight that fills me with awe for the Creator’s wisdom. "
Professor Yan-Der Hsuuw is the director of embryo research at Taiwan’s National Pingtung University of Science and Technology.
He too once believed in evolution until his research led him to conclude otherwise.
Regarding cell division and specialization, he said: "The right cells must be produced in the right order and at the right places.
First they assemble into tissues that will in turn assemble themselves into organs and limbs.
What engineer can even dream of writing instructions for such a process?
Yet the instructions for embryo development are superbly written in DNA.
When I consider the beauty of it all, I’m convinced that life was designed by God. "
1.
Dr. Gene Hwang; 2.
Professor Yan-Der Hsuuw
Gene Hwang (left) and Yan-Der Hsuuw
DOES IT MATTER?
Justice says yes!
If God created life, then God deserves the credit, not evolution.
(Revelation 4:11) Also, if we are the work of an all-wise Creator, then we are here for a reason.
That would not be so if life were a result of undirected processes.
Indeed, thinking people long for satisfying answers.
"Man’s search for meaning is the primary motivation in his life, " said Viktor Frankl, who was a professor of neurology and psychiatry.
To put it another way, we have a spiritual hunger that we yearn to satisfy a hunger that makes sense only in the light of special creation.
But if we are the handiwork of God, did he give us the means to satisfy our spiritual need?
Jesus Christ answered that question, saying: "Man must live, not on bread alone, but on every word that comes from Jehovah’s [or, God’s] mouth. "
(Matthew 4:4) Jehovah’s words, which are recorded in the Bible, have satisfied the spiritual hunger of millions, giving meaning to their lives and providing them with a hope for the future.
(1 Thessalonians 2:13) May the Bible do the same for you.
At the very least, this unique book merits your consideration.
Is Evolution a Scientific Theory?
What qualifies a theory as a scientific theory?
According to the Encyclopedia of Scientific Principles, Laws, and Theories, a scientific theory, such as Albert Einstein’s theory of gravity, must
Be observable
Be reproducible by controlled experiments
Make accurate predictions
In that light, where does evolution stand?
Its operation cannot be observed.
It cannot be reproduced.
And it cannot make accurate predictions.
Can evolution even be considered a scientific hypothesis?
The same encyclopedia defines a hypothesis as "a more tentative observation of facts [than a theory], " yet lends itself "to deductions that can be experimentally tested. "
Creation or Evolution?​—Part 1: Why Believe in God?
Creation or evolution?
Why do I believe in God?
Explaining my belief
Do you believe that God created all things?
If so, you’re not alone; many young people (and adults) share your view.
But others say that life and the universe evolved​—without the help of a “Supreme Being.”
Did you know?
People on both sides of the debate are often quick to state what they believe without really knowing why they believe it.
Some people believe in creation simply because that’s what they’ve been taught at church.
Many people believe in evolution simply because that’s what they’ve been taught at school.
This series of articles will help you to reinforce and explain your belief in creation.
First, though, you need to ask yourself an even more basic question:
Why is that question important?
Because the Bible encourages you to use your mind, “your power of reason.”
(Romans 12:1) That means your belief in God should not be based merely on
emotion (I just feel that there must be a higher power)
the influence of others (I live in a religious community)
pressure (My parents raised me to believe in God​—or else)
Instead, you should be personally convinced that God exists and should have sound reasons for your belief.
So, what convinces you that God exists?
The worksheet “Why Do I Believe in God?” will build your conviction.
You might also find it helpful to consider how other young people have answered that question.
“When I’m in class listening to the teacher explain how our bodies function, there’s no doubt in my mind that God exists.
Each part of the body has its own function, down to the smallest detail, and these functions are often carried out without our awareness.
The human body truly is mind-boggling!”​—Teresa.
“When I see a skyscraper, a cruise ship, or a car, I ask myself, ‘Who built this?’
It takes intelligent people to build a car, for example, because so many small components have to work just right for the whole thing to function.
And if cars have to be designed by someone, then so do we humans.”​—Richard.
“When you realize that it’s taken the most intelligent human minds hundreds of years to understand even the smallest fraction of the universe, then thinking that it took no intelligence to bring that universe into existence seems completely unreasonable!”​—Karen.
“The more I studied science, the less credible evolution seemed.
For example, I thought about the mathematical precision in nature and the uniqueness of humans, including our need to know who we are, where we came from, and where we are going.
Evolution aims to explain all these things in terms associated with animals, but it has never been able to explain why humans are unique.
To me, it takes more ‘faith’ to believe in evolution than to believe in a Creator.”​—Anthony.
What if classmates ridicule you for believing in something you can’t see?
What if they say that science has “proved” evolution?
First, be confident in what you believe.
Do not be intimidated or ashamed.
(Romans 1:​16) After all, remember:
You are not alone; many people still believe in God.
That includes highly intelligent, professional people.
For example, there are scientists who believe there is a God.
When people say that they don’t believe in God, sometimes what they really mean is that they don’t understand God.
Rather than offer evidence to support their view, they raise questions such as, “If God exists, why does he allow suffering?”
In effect, they turn an intellectual issue into an emotional one.
Humans have a “spiritual need.”
(Matthew 5:3) This includes a need to believe in God.
So if someone says there is no God, that person​—not you​—has the responsibility to explain how he or she could reach such a conclusion.​—Romans 1:​18-​20.
Belief in God is entirely reasonable.
It conforms to the proven fact that life cannot come into existence by itself.
No evidence exists to support the idea that life could spontaneously come from nonliving matter.
What, then, could you say if someone questions your belief in God?
Consider a few possibilities.
If someone says: “Only uneducated people believe in God.”
You could respond: “Do you really accept that stereotype?
I don’t.
In fact, in a survey in which more than 1,600 science professors from various elite universities took part, a third did not claim to be atheist or agnostic. * Would you call those professors unintelligent just because they believe in God?”
If someone says: “If God exists, why is there so much suffering in the world?”
You could respond: “Perhaps what you mean is that you don’t understand how God acts​—or in this case, doesn’t seem to act.
Is that right?
[Allow for response.]
I’ve found a satisfying answer to the question about why there is so much suffering.
But understanding it takes an examination of several Bible teachings.
Would you be interested in learning more?”
The next article in this series will discuss why the theory of evolution does not provide a satisfactory explanation for our existence.
Should I Believe in Evolution?
WHY IT MATTERS If evolution is true, life has no lasting purpose.
If creation is true, we can find satisfying answers to questions about life and the future.
WHAT WOULD YOU DO?
Imagine this scenario: Alex is confused.
He has always believed in God and in creation.
But today his biology teacher forcefully claimed that evolution is a fact, that it is based on credible scientific research.
Alex doesn’t want to appear foolish.
‘After all,’ he says to himself, ‘if scientists have proved evolution to be true, who am I to question them?’
If you were Alex, would you accept evolution just because the textbooks present it as fact?
STOP AND THINK!
People on both sides of the debate are often quick to state what they believe without really knowing why they believe it.
Some people believe in evolution simply because that’s what they’ve been taught at school.
SIX QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER
The Bible says: "Every house is constructed by someone, but the one who constructed all things is God. "
(Hebrews 3:4) Is that reasonable to believe?
A young man looks at a house
Claiming that life did not have a Creator is as absurd as claiming that this house did not have a builder
CLAIM: Everything in the universe came as a result of a random big bang.
Who or what caused the big bang?
2.
Which makes more sense that everything came from nothing or that everything came from someone?
CLAIM: Humans evolved from animals.
3.
If humans evolved from animals from apes, for example why is there such a huge gap between the intellectual abilities of humans and those of apes?
4.
Why are even the most "basic " forms of life so incredibly complex?
CLAIM: Evolution is a proven fact.
5.
Has the person making this claim investigated the evidence for himself?
6.
How many people believe in evolution simply because they have been told that all intelligent people believe in it?
"If you were walking through the forest and discovered a beautiful house, would you think: ‘How fascinating! The trees must have fallen in just the right way to make this house.’
Of course not!
It’s just not reasonable.
So why should we believe that everything in the universe just happened to come about? "
Julia.
"Imagine that someone told you that there was an explosion at a printing plant and that the ink spattered onto the walls and ceilings and formed the text of an unabridged dictionary.
Would you believe it? "
Gwen.
WHY BELIEVE IN GOD?
The Bible encourages you to use your "power of reason. "
(Romans 12:1) That means your belief in God should not be based merely on
EMOTION (I just feel that there must be a higher power)
THE INFLUENCE OF OTHERS (I live in a religious community)
PRESSURE (My parents raised me to believe in God I had no choice)
Instead, you should have sound reasons for your belief.
"When I’m in class listening to the teacher explain how our bodies function, there’s no doubt in my mind that God exists.
The human body truly is mind-boggling! "
Teresa.
"When I see a skyscraper, a cruise ship, or a car, I ask myself, ‘Who built this?’
It takes intelligent people to build a car, for example, because so many small components have to work just right for the whole thing to function.
And if cars have to be designed by someone, then so do we humans. "
Richard.
"The more I studied science, the less credible evolution seemed. . . .
To me, it takes more ‘faith’ to believe in evolution than to believe in a Creator. "
Anthony.
TO THINK ABOUT
Despite decades of research, scientists have yet to come up with an explanation for evolution that they can all agree on.
If scientists can’t agree on evolution and they are supposed to be the experts are you wrong to question the theory?
ACTION PLAN
Imagine that a schoolmate says to you: "I don’t believe in God.
Do you? "
Write down what you would say.
DISCOVER MORE!
What Your Peers Say Belief in God
Watch the video What Your Peers Say Belief in God at www.jw.org.
(Look under BIBLE TEACHINGS > TEENAGERS)
Evolution
Some people say that life evolved.
Others contend that God merely started creation off and then let the process of evolution take over.
What does the Bible say?
Does the Bible’s creation account rule out the possibility that the universe began with the big bang?
The Bible simply says: "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. " (Genesis 1:1) It does not comment on exactly how God created everything.
So even if a cosmic explosion produced our universe, that would not contradict what is stated in the Bible.
Rather, Genesis 1:1 would answer the question, Who caused the big bang?
Of course, many scientists believe that the big bang was a spontaneous, undirected event that led to the self-arranging of particles of matter into stars and planets over a period of time.
The Bible does not support that view but states that the formation of the universe was a direct act of God, whether he employed some sort of cosmic explosion or some other method of creation.
Does the Bible’s account allow for living things to change over time?
The Bible says that God created living things "according to their kinds. " (Genesis 1:11, 12, 21, 24, 25) Can variation occur within a kind?
However, does observed adaptation within a kind prove that eventually new kinds can evolve?
An ape’s head superimposed on a man’s head
Consider an example: In the 1970’s, researchers studied finches on the Galápagos Islands.
They noted that climate changes caused finches with slightly larger beaks to survive more readily.
This, some concluded, provided evidence of evolution.
But was it evidence of evolution, or was it simply adaptation?
Years later, the finches with smaller beaks once again dominated the population.
This experiment led Jeffrey H. Schwartz, a professor of anthropology, to conclude that while adaptation may help a species survive under changing circumstances, "it is not creating anything new. "
Can the Bible and the theory of evolution be reconciled?
The Bible says that "[God] created all things. "
(Revelation 4:11) He did not "rest " until his creative work was complete.
(Genesis 2:2) The implication is clear: God did not create a simple organism and then rest, or take a backseat, while that organism evolved over millions of years into various kinds of fish, apes, and humans.
That idea, called macroevolution, denies the role of a Creator, who the Bible says "made the heavens and the earth, the sea, and all that is in them. "
Exodus 20:11; Revelation 10:6.
"You are worthy, Jehovah our God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power, because you created all things. "
Revelation 4:11.
To learn more: The Bible says that God’s "invisible qualities are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward, because they are perceived by the things made. "
(Romans 1:20) Learning about God can give real meaning to life, for he has a loving purpose that includes all who sincerely seek him.
(Ecclesiastes 12:13; Hebrews 11:6) For more information, visit www.jw.org or contact Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Look under BIBLE TEACHINGS > BIBLE QUESTIONS ANSWERED.
Does Science Agree With the Bible?
Yes, for although the Bible is not a science textbook, it is accurate when it mentions matters of science.
Consider some examples showing that science and the Bible agree and that the Bible contains scientific facts that differed greatly from the beliefs of many people living at the time it was written.
The universe had a beginning.
(Genesis 1:1) In contrast, many ancient myths describe the universe, not as being created, but as being organized from existing chaos.
The Babylonians believed that the gods that gave birth to the universe came from two oceans.
Other legends say that the universe came from a giant egg.
The universe is governed day-to-day by rational natural laws, not by the whims of deities.
(Job 38:33; Jeremiah 33:25) Myths from around the world teach that humans are helpless before the unpredictable and sometimes merciless acts of the gods.
The earth is suspended in empty space.
(Job 26:7) Many ancient peoples believed that the world was a flat disk supported by a giant or an animal, such as a buffalo or a turtle.
Rivers and springs are fed by water that has evaporated from the oceans and other sources and then has fallen back to earth as rain, snow, or hail.
(Job 36:27, 28; Ecclesiastes 1:7; Isaiah 55:10; Amos 9:6) The ancient Greeks thought that rivers were fed by underground ocean water, and this idea persisted into the 18th century.
The mountains rise and fall, and today’s mountains were once under the ocean.
(Psalm 104:​6, 8) In contrast, several myths say that the mountains were created in their current form by the gods.
Sanitary practices protect health.
The Law given to the nation of Israel included regulations for washing after touching a dead body, quarantining those with infectious disease, and disposing of human waste safely.
(Leviticus 11:28; 13:​1-5; Deuteronomy 23:13) By contrast, one of the Egyptian remedies in use when these commands were given called for applying to an open wound a mixture that included human excrement.
Are there scientific errors in the Bible?
A reasonable examination of the Bible shows the answer to be no.
Here are some common misconceptions about the scientific accuracy of the Bible:
Myth: The Bible says that the universe was created in six 24-hour days.
Fact: According to the Bible, God created the universe in the indefinite past.
(Genesis 1:1) Also, the days of creation described in chapter 1 of Genesis were epochs whose length is not specified.
Myth: The Bible says that vegetation was created before the sun existed to support photosynthesis.​ Genesis 1:​11, 16.
Fact: The Bible shows that the sun, one of the stars that make up "the heavens, " was created before vegetation.
(Genesis 1:1) Diffused light from the sun reached the earth’s surface during the first "day, " or epoch, of creation.
As the atmosphere cleared, by the third "day " of creation, the light was strong enough to support photosynthesis.
(Genesis 1:​3-5, 12, 13) Only later did the sun become distinctly visible from the surface of the earth.​ Genesis 1:​16.
Myth: The Bible says that the sun revolves around the earth.
Fact: Ecclesiastes 1:5 says: "The sun rises, and the sun sets; then it hurries back to the place where it rises again. "
However, this statement merely describes the apparent motion of the sun as viewed from the earth.
Even today, a person can use the words "sunrise " and "sunset, " yet he knows that the earth revolves around the sun.
Myth: The Bible says that the earth is flat.
Fact: The Bible uses the phrase "the ends of the earth " to mean "the most distant part of the earth "; this does not imply that the earth is flat or that it has an edge.
(Acts 1:8; footnote) Likewise, the expression "the four corners of the earth " is a figure of speech referring to the entire surface of the earth; today a person might use the four points of the compass as a similar metaphor.​ Isaiah 11:12; Luke 13:29.
Myth: The Bible says that the circumference of a circle is exactly three times its diameter, but the correct value is pi (π), or about 3.1416.
Fact: The measurements of "the Sea of cast metal " given at 1 Kings 7:​23 and 2 Chronicles 4:2 indicate that it had a diameter of 10 cubits and that "it took a measuring line 30 cubits long to encircle it. "
These dimensions might have been merely the nearest round numbers.
It is also possible that the circumference and diameter represented inner and outer measurements of the basin respectively.
Outdated or Ahead of Its Time?
SCIENCE
THE BIBLE IS NOT A SCIENCE TEXTBOOK, YET IT CONTAINS STATEMENTS THAT WERE WAY AHEAD OF THEIR TIME.
CONSIDER A FEW EXAMPLES.
Did the physical universe have a beginning?
Leading scientists once felt strongly that the answer was no.
Now they generally accept that there was a beginning to the universe.
The Bible said that clearly all along.​ Genesis 1:1.
What is the shape of the earth?
In ancient times, many people thought that the earth was flat.
In the fifth century B.C.E., Greek scientists suggested that it was a sphere.
But long before that​ in the eighth century B.C.E.​ the Bible writer Isaiah referred to "the circle of the earth, " using a word that may also be rendered "sphere. "​ Isaiah 40:22; footnote.
Are the physical heavens subject to decay?
Greek scientist Aristotle, of the fourth century B.C.E., taught that decay happens only on the earth, while the starry heavens could never change or decay.
That view prevailed for many centuries.
But in the 19th century, scientists formulated the concept of entropy.
It suggests that all matter, whether heavenly or earthly, tends to decay.
One of the scientists who helped to advance this concept, Lord Kelvin, noted that the Bible says about heaven and earth: "Just like a garment they will all wear out. "
(Psalm 102:25, 26) Kelvin believed, as the Bible teaches, that God could choose to prevent such decay from destroying His creations.​ Ecclesiastes 1:4.
What holds up planets such as our earth?
Aristotle taught that all the heavenly bodies were encased in crystalline spheres, each one nested tightly within the next, with the earth innermost.
By the 18th century C.E., scientists were accepting the idea that stars and planets might hang in a void.
But in the book of Job, of the 15th century B.C.E., we read that the Creator is "suspending the earth upon nothing. "​ Job 26:7.
MEDICINE
THE BIBLE, THOUGH NOT A MEDICAL TEXTBOOK, CONTAINS SOME PRINCIPLES THAT REFLECT ADVANCED KNOWLEDGE OF HEALTH.
Isolating sick people.
The Mosaic Law prescribed keeping people with leprosy separate from others.
Not until the plagues of the Middle Ages did medical doctors learn to apply this principle, which is still deemed effective.​ Leviticus, chapters 13 and 14.
Washing after touching a dead body.
Until late in the 19th century, physicians often worked on corpses and then on living patients​ without washing their hands in between.
That practice caused many deaths.
Yet, the Mosaic Law stated that anyone who touched a dead body was ceremonially unclean.
It even directed that water be used for ceremonial cleansing in such cases.
Those religious practices surely had health benefits as well.​ Numbers 19:11, 19.
Waste disposal.
Each year, over half a million children die of diarrhea, largely because of exposure to human waste that is not disposed of properly.
The Mosaic Law said that human waste should be buried, disposed of away from human habitation.​ Deuteronomy 23:13.
Timing of circumcision.
God’s Law stipulated that a male child should be circumcised on the eighth day of life.
(Leviticus 12:3) In newborn babies, the blood’s ability to clot is understood to reach normal levels after the first week.
In Bible times, before advanced medical treatments were available, waiting for over a week before circumcision was a wise protection.
The link between emotional health and physical health.
Medical researchers and scientists say that positive emotions such as joy, hope, gratitude, and a willingness to forgive have some beneficial effects on health.
The Bible says: "A joyful heart is good medicine, but a crushed spirit saps one’s strength. "​ Proverbs 17:22.
How Science Affects Your Life
Science, according to one dictionary, is "the systematic study of the nature and behaviour of the material and physical universe, based on observation, experiment, and measurement. "
To do all of that is hard, often frustrating, work.
Scientists struggle with experiments and observations for weeks, months, or even years.
Sometimes their labors lead to dead ends, but in many cases they deliver benefits to mankind.
Consider a few examples.
A European company has combined strong plastic and advanced filters to produce a device that has made it possible for a person to avoid illness from drinking contaminated water.
Devices like that one have been put to use during natural disasters, such as the 2010 earthquake in Haiti.
High above the earth, networks of satellites make up what is called the Global Positioning System (GPS).
Originally designed for military applications, the GPS helps motorists, airplane pilots, ship navigators, and even hunters and hikers to find their way.
Thanks to the scientists who invented it, the GPS makes it easier to get to where you want to go.
Do you use a cell phone, a computer, or the Internet?
Have you seen that your health has improved or has been restored because of advanced medicine?
Do you travel by airplane?
If so, you are benefiting from some of the ways in which science has been a boon to humanity.
Science has affected your life in many positive ways.
THE REACH OF MODERN SCIENCE
In an effort to expand their horizon, modern scientists are searching deep into the natural world.
Nuclear physicists peer into the inner workings of the atom, while astrophysicists trace back billions of years, in an attempt to understand the origin of the universe.
As they probe deep and far, even into realms that are invisible and untouchable, some scientists feel that if the God of the Bible exists, they should be able to find him.
Some prominent scientists and philosophers go further.
They carry on what science author Amir D. Aczel called "a scientific argument against the existence of God. "
For example, a world-famous physicist claimed that "the absence of evidence for any God who plays an important role in the universe proves beyond a reasonable doubt that such a god does not exist. "
Others allude to the activity of the God of the Bible as "magic " and "supernatural shenanigans. "
However, the question must be asked: Has science learned enough about the natural world to be able to draw definitive conclusions?
The simple answer is no.
Science has made tremendous progress, but many scientists recognize that there are still many unknowns and perhaps unknowables.
"We will never get to the bottom of things, " said physicist and Nobel laureate Steven Weinberg on understanding nature.
Professor Martin Rees, Astronomer Royal of Great Britain, wrote: "There may be things that humans will never understand. "
The truth is that much of nature, from the tiny cell to the vast universe, still remains beyond the grasp of modern science.
Note the following examples:
DNA Biologists do not fully understand the processes that take place in living cells.
How cells consume energy, how they produce proteins, and how they divide are questions science has not yet completely answered.
A boy dropping a ball
Gravity affects us every second of every day.
Yet it is something of a mystery to physicists.
They do not know fully how gravity pulls you down to the ground when you jump or how it keeps the moon in orbit around the earth.
The universe
Cosmologists estimate that about 95 percent of what makes up the universe is invisible and undetectable by scientific instruments.
They divide this strange entity into two categories, dark matter and dark energy.
The nature of these remains unknown.
There are other unknowns that confound scientists.
Why is this important?
A popular science writer notes: "Our knowledge is vastly outstripped by our ignorance.
For me, a life in science prompts awe and exploration over dogmatism. "
So if you wonder whether science is about to replace the Bible and dispense with belief in God, consider this point: If brilliant scientists with their powerful instruments have been able to gain only limited understanding of the natural world, would it be logical to dismiss out of hand the matters that lie beyond the reaches of science to investigate?
Quite to the point, at the end of a lengthy article on the history and development of astronomy, Encyclopedia Britannica concludes: "After almost 4,000 years of astronomy, the universe is no less strange than it must have seemed to the Babylonians. "
Jehovah’s Witnesses respect each person’s right to make a decision on this matter.
We endeavor to follow the Biblical guideline: "Let your reasonableness become known to all. "
(Philippians 4:5) It is with that spirit that we invite you to examine how science and the Bible harmonize and complement each other.
The Bible and Proven Scientific Facts
The Bible does not claim to be a textbook of scientific knowledge.
Its writers, however, did make accurate comments on matters that should interest scientists today.
Here are some examples.
Age of the earth and the universe
Scientists estimate that the earth is about 4 billion years old and that the universe was born some 13 to 14 billion years ago.
The Bible sets no date for the creation of the universe.
In no place does it affirm that the earth is only a few thousand years old.
The very first verse in the Bible reads: "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. " (Genesis 1:1) That general statement allows scientists to determine the age of the physical world according to sound scientific principles.
Mountains, vegetation, and water
Preparation of the earth for human habitation
Genesis chapter 1 uses the term "day " to set out the stages in the preparation of the earth for life in all its diverse forms.
The culminating event in this simple description was the appearance of humans.
The Bible fixes no duration for the six creative "days. "
Instead, it opens the door for modern scientists to study them and assign accurate time spans to them.
We know that the creative "days " were much longer than 24-hour days.
The earth
How the earth is suspended
The Bible describes the earth as suspended "upon nothing. "
(Job 26:7) There is no mention of our planet resting on the shoulders of a giant or on the backs of elephants that stand on a turtle, as some popular myths of ancient times had it.
Rather, the Bible leaves the door open to scientific discovery.
In time, Nicolaus Copernicus and Johannes Kepler described how the planets move around the sun driven by an invisible force.
Isaac Newton later showed how gravitation governs the movement of all objects in space.
Rod-shaped bacteria
Instructions on disease control and hygiene
The book of Leviticus contains the instructions given to the Israelites on how they were to avoid outbreaks of contagious diseases, including the practice of quarantine.
And regarding sanitation, the law recorded at Deuteronomy 23:12, 13 ordered the Israelites to care for their waste in a private place outside their encampments.
They had to ‘cover their excrement’ in the ground.
It is only in the last 200 years that scientists and doctors have seen the need to set such standards.
The Bible information that you just read was written down many centuries ago.
How did those writers come up with such accurate information when even the most learned people of their time were ignorant of such things?
The Bible’s Author answers: "As the heavens are higher than the earth, so my ways are higher than your ways and my thoughts than your thoughts. "
Isaiah 55:9.
Does the Bible Teach That the Earth Is Flat?
No, the Bible does not teach that the earth is flat.
The Bible is not a science textbook.
At the same time, nothing in the Bible contradicts proved science.
What the Bible says is "always reliable, now and forever. "​ Psalm 111:8.
What does the Bible mean by "the four corners of the earth "?
What about the Devil’s temptation of Jesus?
The expressions "the four corners of the earth " and "the ends of the earth " used in the Bible are not to be taken literally, as if the earth were square or had ends.
(Isaiah 11:12; Job 37:3) Instead, these evidently are figures of speech referring to the entire surface of the earth.
The Bible uses the four points of the compass in a similar way.​ Luke 13:29.
The Hebrew term translated "corners " or "ends " seems to be an idiom based on the word for "wings. "
According to The International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, "because the wing of a bird is used as a covering for its young, [this Hebrew term] acquires the meaning of the extremity of anything stretched out. "
The same reference work adds that at Job 37:3 and Isaiah 11:12, "the term means the coasts, boundaries, or extremities of the land surface of the earth. "
What about the Devil’s temptation of Jesus?
To tempt Jesus, "the Devil took him along to an unusually high mountain and showed him all the kingdoms of the world and their glory. "
(Matthew 4:8) Some claim that this Bible account teaches that the entire world is visible from a single spot on a flat earth.
However, the "unusually high mountain " in this account seems to be a metaphor and not a physical location.
Consider why this conclusion is reasonable.
There is no literal mountain on earth from which all the kingdoms of the world are visible.
The Devil showed Jesus not only all the kingdoms but also "their glory. "
Such details could not be seen from a great distance, so it seems that the Devil used some sort of vision to show these to Jesus.
This could be similar to the way a person uses a projector and a screen to show someone pictures of various places on earth.
The parallel account at Luke 4:5 says that the Devil showed Jesus "all the kingdoms of the inhabited earth in an instant of time, " which would not be possible through normal human vision.
This implies that the Devil presented this temptation to Jesus through some means other than literal human sight.
PORTRAITS FROM THE PAST
Ignaz Semmelweis
IGNAZ SEMMELWEIS may not be a household name, yet his work has benefited most modern families.
Born in Buda (now Budapest), Hungary, he received his medical degree at the University of Vienna in 1844.
On taking up his post as assistant to a professor at the First Maternity Clinic of Vienna’s General Hospital in 1846, Semmelweis faced an appalling reality​ more than 13 percent of the women giving birth there died from a disease called childbed fever.
Various theories as to the cause of this disease had been proposed, yet no one had solved the mystery.
All attempts to reduce the mortality rate proved futile.
Troubled by the spectacle of numerous mothers suffering a slow, agonizing death, Semmelweis determined to find the cause of the disease and prevent it.
The hospital in which Semmelweis worked had two separate maternity clinics, and curiously, the maternal death rate was much higher in the first clinic than it was in the second.
The only difference between the two clinics was that medical students were taught in the first and midwives in the second.
Why, then, such a difference in death rates?
Probing that question, Semmelweis systematically eliminated possible causes of the disease, but the culprit remained elusive.
In early 1847, Semmelweis was presented with a crucial clue.
His colleague and friend Jakob Kolletschka had died from blood poisoning after sustaining a wound while performing a postmortem examination.
As he read the report of the autopsy performed on Kolletschka, Semmelweis realized that in some aspects, the findings were identical to those of the victims of childbed fever.
Hence, Semmelweis thought that perhaps what he termed "poisons " from cadavers were infecting pregnant patients, thus causing childbed fever.
Doctors and medical students, who frequently did autopsies before going to the maternity ward, had unwittingly been transmitting the disease to expectant mothers during obstetric examinations or childbirth!
Mortality in the second ward was lower because students of midwifery did not perform autopsies.
Semmelweis immediately introduced a strict policy of handwashing, which included sterilizing the hands in a solution of chlorinated lime before initiating examinations of pregnant women.
The results were dramatic: mortality rates plummeted from 18.27 percent in April to 0.19 percent by the end of the year.
"My doctrines exist to rid maternity hospitals of their horror, to preserve the wife for her husband and the mother for her child. "​ Ignaz Semmelweis
Not all welcomed Semmelweis’ success.
The results he obtained challenged the theories concerning childbed fever held by his superior, who also found Semmelweis’ insistent manner irritating.
Semmelweis eventually lost his post in Vienna and returned to Hungary.
There he took charge of the obstetrics department at the St. Rochus Hospital in Pest, where his methods brought down the mortality rate for childbed fever to under 1 percent.
In 1861, Semmelweis published his life’s work, The Cause, Concept, and Prophylaxis of Childbed Fever.
Unfortunately, the importance of his findings was not recognized until some years later.
In the meantime, countless lives that could have been saved were tragically lost.
Doctors wash their hands
Semmelweis enforced hygienic measures at medical facilities under his supervision.​ Painting by Robert Thom
Semmelweis was eventually recognized as one of the fathers of the modern antiseptic technique.
His work helped to establish that microscopic matter can cause disease.
He is part of the history of the germ theory of disease, which has been called "the single most important contribution to medical science and practice. "
Interestingly, over 3,000 years earlier, the Mosaic Law, which was later included in the Bible, had already provided sound guidance on the proper handling of corpses.
QUICK FACTS
In 19th-century Europe, many women died of childbed fever, a scourge with mortality rates of up to 30 percent.
Microbes had been observed under a microscope as early as 1674, but their dangers had not been fully understood.
It was common practice for doctors to deliver babies right after performing autopsies, without first sterilizing their hands.
Semmelweis introduced handwashing into medical practice, thus saving countless lives.
What the Bible Said
According to the Mosaic Law, which dates to the 16th century B.C.E., anyone touching a corpse became unclean for seven days and had to undergo a cleansing procedure that included bathing and washing his garments.
During this time, the person was to avoid physical contact with others.​ Numbers 19:11-22.
Galileo
Between the 14th and 16th centuries, European scientists and philosophers began to understand the universe in a way that conflicted with the teachings of the Catholic Church.
One man who took a fresh look at the heavens was Galileo Galilei.
BEFORE Galileo’s time, many people believed that the sun, the planets, and the stars all revolved around the earth.
That belief was part of the official dogma of the Catholic Church.
With his telescope, however, Galileo saw evidence that contradicted widely accepted scientific teachings.
For example, as he watched sunspots appear to shift across the surface of the sun, he discerned that the sun rotates on an axis.
Observations like this greatly increased man’s knowledge of the universe, yet they would also result in Galileo’s coming into direct conflict with the Catholic Church.
SCIENCE AND RELIGION
Galileo publicizing his discoveries
Decades earlier, the Polish astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus developed a theory that the earth moves around the sun.
Galileo studied Copernicus’ work on the movements of celestial bodies and collected evidence in harmony with the theory.
Initially, Galileo hesitated to publicize some of his observations, fearing that they would be met with ridicule and scorn.
Unable to restrain his enthusiasm for what he saw through his telescope, he eventually went public with his discoveries.
Some scientists found his arguments to be provocative, and soon clergymen were discrediting Galileo from their pulpits.
In 1616, Cardinal Bellarmine, "a leading theologian of the period, " informed Galileo of a newly issued Catholic decree against Copernicus’ ideas.
He strongly urged Galileo to comply with that decree, and for years thereafter Galileo did not argue publicly that the earth moves around the sun.
In 1623, Pope Urban VIII, Galileo’s friend, began to reign.
So in 1624, Galileo asked the pope to revoke the 1616 decree.
Instead, Urban urged Galileo to explain the conflicting theories of Copernicus and Aristotle in a way that favored neither.
Galileo then wrote a book entitled Dialogue on the Great World Systems.
Although the pope had ordered Galileo to be neutral, the book came across as favoring Copernicus’ conclusions.
Soon Galileo’s enemies were claiming that his book ridiculed the pope.
Accused of heresy and threatened with torture, Galileo was forced to deny the teachings of Copernicus.
In 1633, the Roman Inquisition sentenced him to perpetual house arrest and banned his writings.
Galileo died at home in Arcetri, near Florence, on January 8, 1642.
Pope John Paul II acknowledged that the Catholic Church had wrongly condemned Galileo
For hundreds of years, some of Galileo’s works remained on the index of books that Catholics were not permitted to read.
But in 1979, the church reconsidered the action taken by the Roman Inquisition 300 years earlier.
Finally, in 1992, Pope John Paul II acknowledged that the Catholic Church had wrongly condemned Galileo.
Galileo Galilei was born in 1564 in Pisa, Italy, the city famous for its leaning tower.
He taught at the University of Padua and later lived and worked in Florence.
Although Galileo did not invent the telescope, he greatly improved its magnification and thus its usefulness.
Because of his views on the universe, Galileo was twice called before the Inquisition the Catholic tribunal responsible for the punishment of those who deviated from church doctrine.
Did the Inquisition Torture Galileo?
Some historians have suggested that the Roman Inquisition may have physically tortured Galileo.
The sentence issued against him states that in order to establish Galileo’s real intentions, it was necessary to proceed against him by "rigorous examination. "
In inquisitorial jargon this phrase often meant "torture, " possibly meaning at least "the verbal threat of physical torture. "
Specialists point out that there were stages and degrees of torture.
It could include anything from merely showing the victim the instruments of torment to stripping or binding him or even inflicting physical pain with increasing severity.
The nature of Galileo’s "rigorous examination " remains a mystery.
Aristotle
OVER 2,300 years ago, Aristotle made major contributions to science and philosophy.
His works have commanded sustained interest and have been widely translated and studied.
History Professor James MacLachlan wrote that "Aristotle’s views of nature dominated European thought for almost 2,000 years. "
Some of Aristotle’s views even influenced Catholic and Protestant teachings, as well as Islam.
His Range of Interests Was Vast
Aristotle wrote about art, astronomy, biology, ethics, language, law, logic, magnetism, metaphysics, motion, pleasure, poetry, politics, psychology, and rhetoric, as well as the soul, which he viewed as mortal.
His fame, however, rests foremost on his work in biology and logic.
Ancient Greek scholars relied on their powers of observation, deduction, and logic to explain the natural world.
Starting with what they considered to be obvious truths, they believed that if they reasoned carefully on such truths, they would be able to come to correct conclusions.
Guided by that philosophy, they did draw a number of sound conclusions​ one being that there was an underlying order in the universe.
A major problem, however, was that their powers of observation were limited to their unaided senses​ a limitation that led many brilliant men, including Aristotle, astray.
For instance, they believed that the planets and stars moved around the earth.
At that time, this was considered to be a self-evident truth.
"Both reason and experience seemed to confirm the Greek view of an earth-centred universe, " states the book The Closing of the Western Mind.
That mistaken view would have been of little consequence had it remained purely in the realm of science.
But it did not.
Catholicism Embraces Aristotle
In medieval "Christian " Europe, some of Aristotle’s teachings attained the status of received truth​ that is, they were generally accepted as being correct.
Roman Catholic theologians​ most notably Thomas Aquinas (c.
1224-1274)​ incorporated Aristotle’s writings into their theology.
Thus, Aristotle’s notion that a stationary earth lies at the center of the universe became Catholic dogma.
The teaching was also adopted by Protestant leaders, such as Calvin and Luther, who said it was Biblical.​ See the box " They Read Too Much Into the Bible. "
Some of Aristotle’s teachings attained the status of received truth
"In some areas of thought [Aristotle’s teachings] and Catholicism became virtually indistinguishable, " said writer Charles Freeman.
Thus, it has been said that Aquinas "baptized " Aristotle into the Catholic faith.
In reality, however, "Aquinas was converted to Aristotelianism, " wrote Freeman.
And to some extent, we might add, so was the church.
As a result, Italian astronomer and mathematician Galileo, who dared to present observational proof that the earth orbited the sun, was required to appear before the Inquisition and was forced to recant.
Ironically, Aristotle recognized that scientific knowledge is progressive, subject to revision.
If only churches had adopted the same view!
Aristotle had a passion for knowledge and "a deep reverence for the value and excellence of the universe about him. "​ Aristotle ​A Very Short Introduction.
Nature, he believed, has an eternal "Prime Mover " that causes eternal movement and that is good and exists outside the universe.
Aristotle is credited with founding two sciences​ biology and logic.
Aristotle tutored a Macedonian boy who later became the empire builder Alexander the Great.
A drawing of an earth-centered universe
Many ancients believed in an earth-centered universe
They Read Too Much Into the Bible
Some early theologians clung to Aristotle’s geocentric view of the universe because they read too much into certain Bible passages, such as Psalm 104:5.
It states: "[God] established the earth on its foundations; it will not be moved from its place forever. "
The Bible writer was not describing earth’s place in the cosmos.
Rather, using poetic language, he was pointing to the planet’s permanence according to God’s purpose. ​ Ecclesiastes 1:4.
That said, when the Bible touches on scientific matters, its statements are accurate.
For example, Job 26:7, recorded about 3,500 years ago, says that God "[suspended] the earth upon nothing. "
Job 38:33 states that celestial bodies are governed by physical laws.
God’s Laws on Hygiene Were Ahead of Their Time
Shortly before the nation of Israel entered the Promised Land some 35 centuries ago, God said that he would protect them against "the terrible diseases " that they had known in Egypt.
(Deuteronomy 7:15) One way he did this was by giving them detailed instructions on disease control and hygiene.
For example:
The nation’s code of laws required bathing and clothes washing.
Leviticus 15:4-27.
Regarding human waste, God stated: "A private place should be designated for use outside the camp, and there is where you should go.
A peg should be part of your equipment.
When you squat outside, you should dig a hole with it and then cover your excrement. " Deuteronomy 23:12, 13.
People who were thought to have a communicable disease were quarantined kept away from others for a time.
Before returning, those who recovered from sickness had to wash their garments and bathe in water if they were to be considered "clean. "
Leviticus 14:8, 9. Anyone who touched a dead body was quarantined.
Leviticus 5:2, 3; Numbers 19:16.
Israel’s laws reflected medical concepts and views on sanitation that were far ahead of their time.
Elsewhere, primitive standards of hygiene were prevalent.
Waste was deposited in streets.
Polluted water, contaminated food, and other kinds of refuse created unsanitary conditions that contributed to a high rate of disease and infant mortality.
Ancient medical doctors had little or no knowledge of germs and pathogens.
Egyptians used such "remedies " as lizard blood, pelican dung, dead mice, urine, and moldy bread.
Human as well as animal excrement was also commonly used in their medical procedures.
The ancient Egyptians picked up a variety of parasites from the contaminated waters of the Nile River and its irrigation canals.
Likewise, many infants in Egypt died of diarrhea and similar disorders caused by contaminated food.
The Israelites, on the other hand, benefited and remained comparatively healthy by following the standards set out in God’s Law.
Suffering
Some people feel that God causes human suffering or that, at the very least, he is indifferent to it.
But is that what the Bible teaches?
You might be surprised at the answer.
Does God cause us to suffer?
"For a certainty, God does not act wickedly. "​ Job 34:12.
WHAT PEOPLE SAY
Some say that everything that happens is God’s will.
Thus, they believe that God causes us to suffer.
When natural disasters strike, for instance, they think that these events are God’s way of punishing those who have sinned.
The Bible clearly teaches that God does not cause us to suffer.
For example, the Bible says that when we go through trials, it would be a mistake to say: "I am being tried by God. "
Because "with evil things God cannot be tried, nor does he himself try anyone. "
(James 1:13) In other words, God never causes the trials we face or the suffering that follows.
To do so would be wicked, but "God does not act wickedly. "​ Job 34:12.
If God does not cause us to suffer, then who or what does?
Sadly, humans are often victimized by other imperfect humans.
(Ecclesiastes 8:9) Additionally, we may face calamities because of "unexpected events "​ that is, because of simply being in the wrong place at the wrong time.
(Ecclesiastes 9:11) The Bible teaches that ultimately "the ruler of this world, " Satan the Devil, is responsible for human suffering, for "the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one. "
(John 12:31; 1 John 5:19) It is Satan​ not God ​who causes people to suffer.
Does God care about our suffering?
"During all their distress it was distressing to him. "​ Isaiah 63:9.
Some think that God is indifferent to our trials.
For example, one writer cites what he calls God’s "apparent lack of mercy or pity in reaction to our suffering. "
This writer argues that if God exists, he must view humans with "pitiless indifference. "
Far from depicting God as pitiless or indifferent, the Bible teaches that God is deeply moved by our suffering​ and that he will soon bring an end to it.
Consider three comforting truths found in the Bible.
God is aware of our suffering.
From the very start of human suffering, not a single teardrop has gone unnoticed by Jehovah, whose "watchful eyes " see everything.
(Psalm 11:4; 56:8) For example, when his worshippers in ancient times were being oppressed, God said: "I have certainly seen the affliction of my people. "
No, for he added: "I well know the pains they suffer. "
(Exodus 3:7) Many people have found comfort in that truth alone​ the thought that God is aware of everything we suffer, even the trials that others may not be aware of or fully understand.​ Psalm 31:7; Proverbs 14:10.
God feels for us when we suffer.
Jehovah God is not only aware of human suffering but also deeply moved by it.
For example, God was sincerely troubled when his ancient worshippers faced trials.
"During all their distress it was distressing to him, " says the Bible.
(Isaiah 63:9) Although God is vastly superior to humans, he feels empathy for those who suffer​ as if their pain were in his heart!
Indeed, "Jehovah is very compassionate and merciful. "
(James 5:11; footnote) Additionally, Jehovah helps us to bear our suffering.​ Philippians 4:12, 13.
God will end all human suffering.
According to the Bible, God will bring an end to the suffering of every human on the planet.
By means of his heavenly Kingdom, Jehovah will drastically change the human condition​ for the better.
Regarding that time, the Bible promises that God "will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.
The former things have passed away. "
(Revelation 21:4) What about those who have already died?
God will bring them back to life here on earth so that they too can enjoy life free from suffering.
(John 5:28, 29) Will anyone be plagued by painful memories of past suffering?
No, for Jehovah promises: "The former things will not be called to mind, nor will they come up into the heart. "​ Isaiah 65:17.
Suffering​ Is It Punishment From God?
LUZIA LIMPS ON HER LEFT LEG.
As a small child, she contracted poliomyelitis, a highly contagious disease that attacks the body’s nervous system.
When she was 16, a lady whom Luzia worked for told her, "God punished you with paralysis because you were disobedient and nasty to your mother. "
Years later, Luzia still remembers how devastated she felt.
WHEN DAMARIS LEARNED THAT SHE HAD BRAIN CANCER, her father asked her: "What have you done for this to happen to you?
You must have done something very bad.
That is why God is punishing you. "
Damaris’ spirit was crushed by his comment.
The thought that sickness is punishment from God has a long history.
The book Manners and Customs of Bible Lands says that many in Christ’s time believed that "sickness was caused by either the sin of the sick person, or of his relations, and that it was sent as punishment for that sin. "
Medieval Medicine and the Plague says that in the Middle Ages "some people believed that God brought plagues to punish them for their sins. "
So when millions throughout Europe died from the plague in the 14th century, was God executing judgment on wicked people?
Or was the plague simply caused by a bacterial infection, as medical researchers have since determined?
Some may wonder, does God really use sickness to make people suffer for their sins?
CONSIDER: Why would Jesus heal people who were sick if sickness and suffering were deserved punishments from God?
Would that not amount to undermining God’s justice and righteousness?
(Matthew 4:23, 24) Jesus would never counteract God’s actions.
He said: "I always do the things pleasing to him " and, "I am doing just as the Father has commanded me to do. "​ John 8:29; 14:31.
The Bible is clear.
Jehovah God "is never unjust. " (Deuteronomy 32:4) For example, God would never cause an airplane disaster, killing hundreds of innocent people, because he wanted to punish someone on board!
In harmony with God’s righteousness, Abraham, a faithful servant of God, said that God would never "sweep away the righteous with the wicked. "
That would be "unthinkable, " he said.
(Genesis 18:23, 25) The Bible also says that "God does not act wickedly "; he does not "do wrong. "​ Job 34:10-12.
WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES US ABOUT SUFFERING
The suffering we encounter is not divine punishment for a specific sin.
Jesus himself was very clear on this matter when he and his disciples saw a man who had been blind from birth.
"His disciples asked him: ‘Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, so that he was born blind?’
Jesus answered: ‘Neither this man sinned nor his parents, but it was so that the works of God might be made manifest in his case.’ "​ John 9:1-3.
In view of prevailing misconceptions, Jesus’ disciples must have been surprised when he told them that neither the man nor his parents had sinned in a way that brought on misfortune.
Not only did Jesus cure the man’s blindness but by so doing he overturned the erroneous belief that suffering is punishment from God.
(John 9:6, 7) Those who suffer from serious health problems today can find comfort in knowing that God is not the cause of their affliction.
Why would Jesus heal sick people if God was punishing them for wrongdoing?
The Scriptures assure us
"With evil things God cannot be tried, nor does he himself try anyone. "
(JAMES 1:13) Indeed, the "evil things " that have plagued mankind for centuries, including sickness, pain, and death, will soon be eliminated.
Jesus Christ "cured all who were suffering. "
(MATTHEW 8:16) In healing all who came to him, God’s Son demonstrated what God’s Kingdom will accomplish on a worldwide scale.
"He [God] will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.
The former things have passed away. "​ REVELATION 21:3-5.
WHO IS TO BLAME?
Why, then, does mankind experience so much pain and suffering?
Mankind has been pondering that question for centuries.
If God is not to blame, who is responsible?
The answers to those questions will be discussed in the next article.
How Can I Deal With Tragedy?
Tragedy can affect anyone.
"The swift do not always win the race, nor do the mighty win the battle, " the Bible says. "Unexpected events overtake them all. "
(Ecclesiastes 9:11) That includes some young people who have faced tragedy.
How have they dealt with it?
Consider two examples.
REBEKAH
CORDELL
Rebekah
My parents divorced when I was 14.
I told myself that my parents’ divorce wasn’t happening, that my dad just needed time to himself for a while.
He loved my mom​ why would he leave her?
Why would he leave me?
It was difficult for me to talk to anyone about what was happening.
I wanted to block it out.
I was angry, although at the time I didn’t realize it.
I began having problems with anxiety, and I had trouble sleeping.
When I was 19, I lost my mother to cancer.
She was my best friend.
If my parents’ divorce was shocking, my mom’s death was utterly devastating.
I’m still not over it.
Sleep has gotten even more elusive for me, and I still have anxiety.
At the same time, I have found several things to be helpful.
For example, Proverbs 18:1 warns us against isolating ourselves, so I try to follow that advice.
Also, as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, I try to read our encouraging Bible-based publications.
One that helped me during the time of my parents’ divorce was Questions Young People Ask​ Answers That Work.
In particular, I remember reading the chapter in Volume 2 entitled "Can I Be Happy in a Single-Parent Family? "
One of my favorite scriptures for dealing with my anxiety is found at Matthew 6:​25-34.
In verse 27, Jesus asked: "Who of you by being anxious can add one cubit to his life span? "
Bad things will happen to all of us, but I learned from my mom’s example that the way we deal with those trials is important.
She went through a lot​ a divorce and then a terminal illness​ but through it all she kept a positive attitude, and her faith in God remained strong right to the end.
I’ll never forget the things she taught me about Jehovah.
To think about: How can reading the Bible and Bible-based publications help you deal with tragedy?​ Psalm 94:19.
Cordell
When I was 17, I saw my father take his last breath.
Losing him was the worst thing that ever happened in my life.
I was devastated.
I felt that he wasn’t really dead, that it wasn’t really my dad under the sheets when they covered the body.
I told myself, ‘He will wake up tomorrow.’
I felt empty and lost.
My family and I are Jehovah’s Witnesses, and our congregation was a tremendous support when my father died.
They fed us, offered to stay with us, and stuck close to us​ not just for a little while but for the long term.
To me, their support was proof that Jehovah’s Witnesses are genuine Christians.​ John 13:35.
A scripture that has really encouraged me is 2 Corinthians 4:​17, 18.
It says: "Though the tribulation is momentary and light, it works out for us a glory that is of more and more surpassing greatness and is everlasting; while we keep our eyes, not on the things seen, but on the things unseen.
For the things seen are temporary, but the things unseen are everlasting. "
That last verse was powerful to me.
My father’s suffering was temporary, but what God promises for the future is everlasting.
My dad’s death gave me the opportunity to reflect on how I was using my life and to adjust my goals.
To think about: How can a personal tragedy help you to reassess your goals in life?​ 1 John 2:17.
Does God Care About Our Suffering?
The following is a typical conversation that one of Jehovah’s Witnesses might have with a neighbor.
Let us imagine that a Witness named Michelle has come to the home of a woman named Sophia.
HOW COULD HE LET THIS HAPPEN?
Michelle: Today I’m sharing this tract with everyone in the area.
It’s entitled Would You Like to Know the Truth?
Here’s your copy.
Sophia: Is this about religion?
Michelle: Yes.
Notice the six questions listed on the cover.
Which of these questions
Sophia: Let me stop you there.
You would be wasting your time talking with me.
Michelle: Why do you say that?
Sophia: The truth is, I’m not sure that I even believe in God.
Michelle: Well, I appreciate your being honest with me.
May I ask, Have you always felt that way?
Sophia: No, I grew up attending church.
But I stopped going a long time ago.
Michelle: I see.
By the way, allow me to introduce myself.
My name is Michelle.
Sophia: I’m Sophia.
Michelle: Nice to meet you, Sophia.
Sophia: You too.
Michelle: I’m not here to force my beliefs on you, Sophia. I am curious, though.
Is there something in particular that caused you to doubt God’s existence?
Sophia: Yes.
My mother was involved in a car crash 17 years ago.
Michelle: I’m so sorry to hear that.
Was she injured?
Sophia: Yes, she’s been paralyzed ever since.
Michelle: That is so sad.
You must be devastated.
Sophia: I am.
I just can’t help but wonder, If God exists, how could he let this happen?
Why would God allow us to suffer like this?
IS IT WRONG TO ASK WHY?
Michelle: Your feelings and questions are understandable.
When we suffer, it’s only normal to wonder why.
In fact, even some faithful men and women in Bible times wondered about that!
Sophia: Really?
Would it be all right if I showed you an example from the Bible?
Sophia: I would like that.
Michelle: Notice what the faithful prophet Habakkuk asked God, as recorded at Habakkuk, chapter 1, verses 2 and 3: "How long, O Jehovah, must I cry for help, and you do not hear?
How long shall I call to you for aid from violence, and you do not save?
Why is it that you make me see what is hurtful? "
Do those questions sound similar to the ones you’ve been asking?
Sophia: They do.
Michelle: God never scolded Habakkuk for asking those questions, nor did he tell Habakkuk that he simply needed more faith.
Sophia: Interesting.
JEHOVAH HATES SUFFERING
Michelle: The Bible teaches that God notices our suffering and that he cares about it.
Sophia: What do you mean?
Michelle: Let me show you an example here at Exodus 3:7.
Would you mind reading that verse?
Sophia: All right.
It says: "And Jehovah added: ‘Unquestionably I have seen the affliction of my people who are in Egypt, and I have heard their outcry as a result of those who drive them to work; because I well know the pains they suffer.’ "
Michelle: Thank you.
Based on this scripture, does God notice when his people suffer?
Sophia: Yes, it seems that he does.
Michelle: And he’s not just vaguely aware of what happens.
Look again at the last part of that verse.
God said: "I well know the pains they suffer. "
Do those sound like the words of a cold or aloof God?
Sophia: No, not really.
Michelle: Of course, it’s one thing to notice a situation, but to be moved by it to have feelings about the situation is something else altogether.
Sophia: True.
Michelle: With that in mind, let’s read about another instance when God’s people were suffering.
It’s recorded at Isaiah 63:9.
The first part of that verse says: "During all their distress it was distressing to him. "
Would you say, then, that God was affected by the suffering of his people?
Sophia: Yes, it does sound that way.
Michelle: The truth is, Sophia, God cares a great deal about us, and he hates to see us suffer.
When we hurt, he hurts with us.
WHY HAS HE WAITED?
Michelle: Before I go, there’s one other thought I would like to share with you.
Sophia: All right.
Michelle: Consider what the Bible teaches us about God’s power.
The verse I have in mind is Jeremiah 10:12.
Would you please read it?
Sophia: Sure.
It says: "He is the Maker of the earth by his power, the One firmly establishing the productive land by his wisdom, and the One who by his understanding stretched out the heavens. "
Michelle: Thank you.
Let’s think about this verse for a moment.
Would God have needed a lot of power to create the vast universe and everything in it?
Sophia: Definitely.
Michelle: Now, if God has the power to create everything around us, would we not expect that he also has the power to control his creation?
Michelle: Think again of your mother.
Why does it bother you to see her suffer?
Sophia: Because I love her.
She’s my mother.
Michelle: And if you had the power to heal her today, would you?
Sophia: Of course.
Michelle: Think of what that means.
The Bible teaches that God notices our suffering, he feels for us, and he has a vast amount of power.
Can you imagine, then, how much self-control it must take for God not to step in and immediately end our suffering?
Sophia: I never thought of it that way before.
Michelle: Could it be that he has good reason for not yet intervening to end our problems?
Sophia: Hmm, I suppose he might.
Michelle: I hear your telephone ringing, so let me come back another time, and we can discuss this topic further.
Sophia: Thank you.
I would like that.
Do you have a particular Bible subject that you have wondered about?
Are you curious about any of the beliefs or religious practices of Jehovah’s Witnesses?
If so, do not hesitate to ask one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
He or she will be pleased to discuss such matters with you.
Why Does God Allow Evil and Suffering?
How did evil begin?
Adam looking at the forbidden fruit; 2.
Various human rulers; 3.
Scenes of war
God has allowed men to rule for long enough to demonstrate that they cannot resolve mankind’s problems
Evil began on earth when Satan told the first lie.
Satan was originally a perfect angel, but "he did not stand fast in the truth. "
(John 8:44) He developed a desire for worship that rightly belongs only to God.
Satan lied to the first woman, Eve, and persuaded her to obey him instead of God.
Adam joined Eve in disobeying God.
Adam’s decision led to suffering and death.​ Read Genesis 3:1-6, 19.
When Satan suggested that Eve disobey God, he was starting a rebellion against God’s sovereignty, or position as Most High.
The majority of mankind have joined Satan in rejecting God as their Ruler.
Thus, Satan has become "the ruler of the world. "​ Read John 14:30; 1 John 5:19.
Was God’s creation defective?
All of God’s works are perfect.
The humans and angels whom God created were capable of obeying God perfectly.
(Deuteronomy 32:4, 5) God created us with the freedom to choose between doing good and doing evil.
That freedom gives us a way to express love for God.​ Read James 1:13-15; 1 John 5:3.
Why has God allowed suffering until now?
For a limited time, Jehovah has allowed rebellion against his sovereignty.
To show that no effort to rule without him benefits people.
(Ecclesiastes 7:29; 8:9) After 6,000 years of human history, the evidence is clear.
Human rulers have failed to eliminate war, crime, injustice, or disease.​ Read Jeremiah 10:23; Romans 9:17.
In contrast to human rulership, God’s rule benefits those who accept it.
(Isaiah 48:17, 18) Soon, Jehovah will bring all human government to an end.
Only people who choose to be ruled by God will inhabit the earth.​ Isaiah 11:9; Read Daniel 2:44.
Watch the video Why Does God Allow Suffering?
What does God’s patience allow us to do?
Satan claimed that no one would serve Jehovah out of unselfish love.
Would you like to disprove that lie?
You can!
God’s patience allows all of us to show whether we favor rule by God or rule by man.
We indicate our choice by the way we live.​ Read Job 1:8-12; Proverbs 27:11.
How can we choose God as our Ruler?
People studying the Bible
Our choices reveal whether we want God as our Ruler
Why Did the Holocaust Happen?
Why Didn’t God Stop It?
Many who ask these questions have suffered extreme personal loss and seek not just answers but solace.
Others see the Holocaust as the height of human evil, and they struggle to believe in God.
Common misconceptions about God and the Holocaust
Myth: It’s wrong to ask why God allowed the Holocaust.
Fact: People of great faith have questioned why God allows evil.
For instance, the prophet Habakkuk asked God: "Why do you allow violence, lawlessness, crime, and cruelty to spread everywhere? "
(Habakkuk 1:3, Contemporary English Version) Rather than rebuke Habakkuk, God had the questions he asked recorded in the Bible for all to read.
Myth: God doesn’t care about human suffering.
Fact: God hates wickedness and the suffering it causes.
(Proverbs 6:16-19) Back in the days of Noah, God "felt hurt at his heart " because of the violence spreading in the earth.
(Genesis 6:5, 6) No doubt, God also felt tremendous pain over the Holocaust.
Malachi 3:6.
Myth: The Holocaust was God’s punishment of the Jews.
Fact: God did allow Jerusalem to be destroyed by the Romans in the first century.
(Matthew 23:37–24:2) Since then, however, God does not single out any ethnic group for special favor or for punishment.
In God’s view, "there is no difference between Jews and Gentiles. "
Romans 10:12, Good News Translation.
Myth: If a loving and all-powerful God existed, he would have prevented the Holocaust.
Fact: Although God never causes suffering, he sometimes allows it temporarily.
James 1:13; 5:11.
Why did God allow the Holocaust?
God allowed the Holocaust for the same reason that he has permitted all human suffering: to settle moral issues that were raised long ago.
The Bible clearly indicates that at present the Devil, not God, rules the world.
(Luke 4:1, 2, 6; John 12:31) Two basic facts from the Bible can help explain why God allowed the Holocaust.
God created humans with free will.
God told the first humans, Adam and Eve, what he expected of them, but he did not force them to obey.
They chose to decide for themselves what was good and bad, and their bad choice and similar choices by people throughout history has brought horrible consequences to mankind.
(Genesis 2:17; 3:6; Romans 5:12) It is as the book Statement of Principles of Conservative Judaism says: "Much of the world’s suffering directly results from our misuse of the free will granted to us. "
Rather than revoke our free will, God has given humans time to try to manage their affairs independent of him.
God can and will undo all the damage of the Holocaust.
God promises to bring back to life millions who have died, including Holocaust victims.
He will also eliminate the pain that Holocaust survivors feel because of horrific memories.
(Isaiah 65:17; Acts 24:15) God’s love for mankind guarantees that he will fulfill these promises.
John 3:16.
Many Holocaust victims and survivors were able to maintain their faith and find meaning in life by understanding why God has allowed evil and how he purposes to undo its effects.
The End of Suffering Is at Hand!
Imagine living in a world free of suffering a world without crime, warfare, sickness, and natural disasters.
Imagine waking up every morning without having to worry about discrimination, oppression, or economic uncertainty.
Does all of this sound too good to be true?
Granted, no human or man-made organization can bring about such conditions.
But God has promised to do away with all causes of human suffering, including those discussed in the preceding article.
Note the following promises from God’s Word, the Bible:
THE RULE OF GOOD GOVERNMENT
"The God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. And the kingdom itself will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite. "
Daniel 2:44.
The Kingdom of God is a heavenly government.
Its chosen Ruler, Jesus Christ, will take the place of all human rulership and will ensure that God’s will is done not only in heaven but also here on earth.
(Matthew 6:9, 10) This government will not be replaced by any human government because it is "the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. "
Lasting peace will be assured.
2 Peter 1:11.
NO MORE FALSE RELIGION
"Satan himself keeps transforming himself into an angel of light.
It is therefore nothing great if his ministers also keep transforming themselves into ministers of righteousness.
But their end shall be according to their works. " 2 Corinthians 11:14, 15.
False religion will be exposed as the work of the Devil and will be eliminated from the earth.
Gone will be all religious bigotry and bloodshed.
This will allow all lovers of the "living and true God " to worship him in "one faith " and "with spirit and truth. "
What peace and unity! 1 Thessalonians 1:9; Ephesians 4:5; John 4:23.
HUMAN IMPERFECTION WILL BE NO MORE
"God himself will be with them.
And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.
Revelation 21:3, 4.
Jehovah God makes this possible by means of his Son, Jesus, who gave his life for the world of mankind.
(John 3:16) Under Jesus’ direction, humankind will be brought to perfection.
There will no longer be any suffering because "God himself will be with them " and will erase "every tear from their eyes. "
Human imperfection and suffering will soon be a thing of the past; "the righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it. "
Psalm 37:29.
WICKED SPIRITS WILL BE GONE
"He [Jesus Christ] seized the dragon, the original serpent, who is the Devil and Satan, and bound him for a thousand years.
And he hurled him into the abyss and shut it and sealed it over him, that he might not mislead the nations anymore. "
Revelation 20:2, 3.
All satanic influence will be gone when Satan and the demons are bound and hurled into "the abyss, " a state of total inactivity.
They will no longer exercise their evil control over human affairs.
What a relief it will be to live in a world free from the influence of Satan and the wicked spirits!
"THE LAST DAYS " WILL BE OVER
"The last days " will end with what Jesus called the "great tribulation. "
He said: "Then there will be great tribulation such as has not occurred since the world’s beginning until now, no, nor will occur again. "
Matthew 24:21.
The tribulation will be great in the sense that unprecedented calamities will occur.
These will climax at "the war of the great day of God the Almighty, " better known as "Armageddon. "
Revelation 16:14, 16, footnote.
People everywhere who love what is right look forward to the end of this wicked system of things.
Consider just a few of the blessings that await them under God’s Kingdom.
GOD WILL DO EVEN MORE!
"A great crowd " will be preserved into a peaceful new world: God’s Word says that an unnumbered "great crowd " of people will "come out of the great tribulation " and be preserved alive into a righteous new world.
(Revelation 7:9, 10, 14; 2 Peter 3:13) They will attribute their salvation to Jesus Christ, "the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world. "
John 1:29.
Great benefits will come from divine education: In the new world, "the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah. "
(Isaiah 11:9) This divine education will include instruction on how to live in peace with all people and in harmony with the environment.
God promises: "I, Jehovah, am your God, the One teaching you to benefit yourself, the One causing you to tread in the way in which you should walk. "
Isaiah 48:17.
Dead loved ones will be raised from the grave: While on earth, Jesus raised his friend Lazarus from the dead.
(John 11:1, 5, 38-44) Thus he demonstrated what he will do on a much larger scale under God’s Kingdom arrangement.
John 5:28, 29.
Peace and righteousness will prevail forever: Under Christ’s rulership, lawlessness will be a thing of the past.
How do we know that?
Because Jesus is able to read hearts, and he will use that ability to judge between the righteous and the wicked.
Those who refuse to change their wicked ways will not be allowed to live in God’s new world.
Psalm 37:9, 10; Isaiah 11:3, 4; 65:20; Matthew 9:4.
We have considered just a few of the many Bible prophecies that point to the wonderful time to come.
When God’s Kingdom exercises rulership over the earth, an "abundance of peace " will prevail forever.
(Psalm 37:11, 29) All the causes of pain and suffering that have plagued mankind will be undone.
We have God’s own word on it: "Look!
I am making all things new. . . .
These words are faithful and true. "
Revelation 21:5.
When a Loved One Dies
"God knows best, baby. . . .
Don’t . . . you . . . cry. "
Those words were whispered into the ear of a woman named Bebe. She was at the funeral of her father, who had died in a car accident.
Bebe had been very close to her father.
The remark came from a well-meaning family friend, but Bebe found it more cutting than comforting.
"His death wasn’t for the best, " she kept repeating to herself.
It was clear that when Bebe recounted the incident in a book years later, she was still grieving.
As Bebe came to see, it can take a long time for someone to overcome grief, especially when the bereaved person was very close to the deceased.
In the Bible, death is aptly described as "the last enemy. " (1 Corinthians 15:26) It breaks into our lives with irresistible force, often when we are completely unprepared, and it robs us of those we hold dear.
None of us are immune to its ravages.
So it is not surprising if we feel at a loss when it comes to coping with death and its aftermath.
Perhaps you have wondered: ‘How long does it take to get over grief?
How can a person cope with grief?
How can I comfort others who have been bereaved?
Is there any hope for our loved ones who have died?’
Loss of a Loved One
Ronaldo, in Brazil, was in a car accident that took the lives of five family members, including his mother and father.
"I was in the hospital for two months before I was told that they had died in the crash, " he says.
Ronaldo
"At first, I could not believe that they were gone.
How could they all be dead?
Once I realized that it was true, I was shocked.
I had never felt such pain.
In the days that followed, I felt that life was not worth living without them.
I cried every day for months!
I blamed myself for letting someone else drive the car.
If only I had been driving, they might still be alive.
"Sixteen years have passed, and I have been able to get back to my routine of life.
However, their tragic death has left a void in my heart that has yet to be filled. "
COPING WITH TRAGEDY
Grieve over your loss.
The Bible says that there is "a time to weep. "
(Ecclesiastes 3:1, 4) Ronaldo says: "Every time I felt like crying, I allowed myself to do so.
Fighting back tears was futile anyway, and I felt relief afterward. "
Of course, not everyone grieves in the same way.
So if you do not outwardly display sorrow, this does not mean that you are suppressing your emotions or that you should force tears.
Avoid isolating yourself.
(Proverbs 18:1) "I tried not to give in to the urge to remain socially isolated, " says Ronaldo.
"People visited me, and I welcomed them.
I also poured out my feelings to my wife and close friends. "
Remain calm if someone says painful words.
These might include expressions such as "It was for the best. "
Ronaldo recalls, "Some comments that were meant to comfort me had the opposite effect. "
Rather than dwelling on sayings that hurt, follow the Bible’s wise advice: "Do not take to heart every word that people say. "
Ecclesiastes 7:21.
Learn the truth about the condition of the dead.
Ronaldo says: "At Ecclesiastes 9:5, the Bible shows that the dead are not suffering, and that fact gives me an inner peace.
The Bible also teaches that there is going to be a resurrection and that those who are dead will be brought back to life.
So I think of the loved ones I have lost in death as if they were away on a trip. "
Acts 24:15.
The Bible promises a time when God "will swallow up death forever. "
Isaiah 25:8.
This series of articles discusses how you can cope with tragedy.
For Bible-based information on the reasons for human suffering, see the series of articles "Why Do Bad Things Happen to Good People? " in the July 1, 2014, issue of our companion journal, The Watchtower.
Coping With Grief​ What You Can Do Today
If you look for advice on dealing with grief, you will likely find a myriad of ideas​ some more helpful than others.
Perhaps that is because, as mentioned earlier, everyone grieves differently.
What works for one person may not work for someone else.
Even so, there are some basic guidelines that have proved practical for many.
They are frequently cited by grief counselors, and they echo timeless principles found in an ancient book of wisdom, the Bible.
1: ACCEPT SUPPORT FROM FAMILY AND FRIENDS
People at the seashore fly a kite and take pictures
Some experts consider this to be the most important factor in getting through grief.
Yet, at times, you may want to be alone.
You may even feel irritated at those who are trying to help you.
This is normal.
Do not feel that you must always be around others, but do not completely push them away either.
After all, you may need their support in the future.
Kindly let others know what you need at the moment and what you do not.
According to your needs, find a balance between time with other people and time alone.
PRINCIPLE: "Two are better than one . . .
For if one of them falls, the other can help his partner up. "​ Ecclesiastes 4:9, 10.
2: WATCH YOUR DIET, AND MAKE TIME FOR EXERCISE
A balanced diet will help with the stress that comes from dealing with grief.
Try to eat a variety of fruits, vegetables, and lean proteins.
Drink plenty of water and other healthful liquids.
If your appetite is low, eat small portions more frequently.
You may also ask your doctor about nutrition supplements.
Brisk walks and other forms of exercise can lessen negative emotions.
Exercise can provide time to reflect on your loss or to take a break from thinking about it.
PRINCIPLE: "No one has ever hated his own body but he feeds it and takes care of it. "​ Ephesians 5:29, NET Bible.
3: GET PLENTY OF SLEEP
A bed
Sleep is always important, but this is especially so for those who are grieving, as grief can bring extra fatigue.
Be careful with the amount of caffeine and alcohol you consume, as both can interfere with your sleep.
PRINCIPLE: "Better is a handful of rest than two handfuls of hard work and chasing after the wind. "​ Ecclesiastes 4:6.
4: BE FLEXIBLE
A grieving woman expresses herself to a friend
Recognize that everyone grieves differently.
Ultimately, you will need to determine the strategy that works best for you.
Many find that expressing their grief to others helps them deal with it, while others prefer not to express their grief.
Experts have various opinions as to whether expressing one’s feelings is vital to success in coping with grief.
If you need to confide in someone but are hesitant to do so, you might find it easier to start small by expressing some of your feelings to a close friend.
Some people find that crying helps them deal with their grief, while others seem to cope even though they cry less.
PRINCIPLE: "Each heart knows its own bitterness. "​ Proverbs 14:10, New International Version.
5: AVOID SELF-DESTRUCTIVE HABITS
A man drinks alcohol
Some bereaved ones try to ease their emotional pain through the misuse of alcohol or drugs.
Such "escape " is self-destructive.
Any relief a person may feel is short-lived, only to be followed by major negative consequences.
Try harmless ways to calm your anxieties.
PRINCIPLE: "Let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement. "​ 2 Corinthians 7:1.
6: BALANCE YOUR TIME
Many find it helpful to alternate periods of grieving (experiencing and dealing with their emotions) with temporary breaks (activities that temporarily distance them from their pain).
You may find temporary relief by forming or strengthening friendships, learning new skills, or engaging in recreation.
As time passes, the balance will likely change.
You may notice that your breaks from grieving become longer and more frequent​ a natural part of the healing process.
PRINCIPLE: "There is an appointed time for everything, . . . a time to weep and a time to laugh; a time to wail and a time to dance. "​ Ecclesiastes 3:1, 4.
7: KEEP A ROUTINE
A woman uses a calendar to plan her routine
As soon as possible, resume a normal routine.
When you hold to a routine for sleep, work, and other activities, you will likely regain a sense of normalcy.
Keeping yourself occupied with positive activities can help to mitigate painful emotions.
PRINCIPLE: "He will hardly notice the passing days of his life, because the true God keeps him preoccupied with the rejoicing of his heart. "​ Ecclesiastes 5:20.
8: AVOID MAKING BIG DECISIONS TOO SOON
Many who make big decisions soon after losing a loved one later regret those decisions.
If possible, wait for a reasonable length of time before moving, changing jobs, or discarding your loved one’s belongings.
PRINCIPLE: "The plans of the diligent surely lead to success, but all who are hasty surely head for poverty. "​ Proverbs 21:5.
9: REMEMBER YOUR LOVED ONE
A man shows friends pictures of his deceased wife
Many bereaved ones feel it is beneficial to do things that help keep alive their memory of the person who has died.
You might find it therapeutic to collect pictures or mementos or to create a journal of events and stories you wish to recall.
Store items that trigger pleasant memories and look through them later, when you feel ready.
PRINCIPLE: "Remember the days of old. "​ Deuteronomy 32:7.
10: GET AWAY
You might consider taking a vacation.
If a lengthy vacation is not practical, perhaps you can do something enjoyable for just a day or two, such as hiking, visiting a museum, or taking a drive.
Even a brief change of pace can help you cope with your grief.
PRINCIPLE: "Come, you yourselves, privately into an isolated place and rest up a little. "​ Mark 6:31.
11: HELP OTHERS
A young woman helps an older woman with her grocery shopping
Remember that any time you can spend being of help to others can help you feel better.
You might start by helping others who have been affected by the loss of your loved one, such as friends or relatives who may need a grieving companion.
Supporting and comforting others can give you renewed joy and a sense of purpose that may seem to be lacking.
PRINCIPLE: "There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving. "​ Acts 20:35.
12: REEVALUATE YOUR PRIORITIES
Grief can provide new insights into what truly matters.
Take advantage of the opportunity to evaluate how you are using your life.
As needed, make adjustments in your priorities.
PRINCIPLE: "Better to go to the house of mourning than to the house of feasting, for that is the end of every man, and the living should take it to heart. "​ Ecclesiastes 7:2.
COPING WITH GRIEF | SUMMARY
According to your needs, balance time spent with others and time spent alone.
Eat healthful food, drink plenty of water, and exercise moderately.
Recognize that sleep is essential to dealing with the fatigue of grieving.
Since everyone grieves differently, find what works for you.
Avoid the misuse of alcohol or drugs​ which creates more problems than it solves.
Alternate periods of grieving with time for socializing and recreation.
Regain a sense of normalcy by keeping yourself occupied with a good routine.
If possible, wait a year or more before making big decisions you may later regret.
Collect pictures and mementos or write in a journal to keep alive your memory of the person who has died.
Make time for a change of pace​ even if for just a day or part of a day.
Renew your sense of purpose by doing things for those who need help, including others affected by the loss of your loved one.
Use this opportunity to gain new insights into what truly matters and, as needed, make adjustments to your priorities.
Realistically, nothing will completely erase the pain you feel.
However, many who have lost a loved one can attest that taking positive steps, such as those listed in this article, helped them to find comfort.
Of course, this is not a comprehensive list of every possible way to alleviate grief.
But if you try some of these suggestions, you may find that they will bring you a welcome measure of relief.
"I felt helpless when my older brother died unexpectedly.
Months later I would suddenly remember him and feel sick, as if a knife were stabbing me deep inside.
At times, I was also angry.
Why did my brother have to die?
And I felt guilty for not having spent more time with him. "​ Vanessa, Australia.
IF YOU have lost someone you love in death, you too may have felt a wide range of emotions, from sorrow to loneliness and helplessness.
Perhaps you have also felt anger, guilt, and fear.
You may have even wondered whether life is still worth living.
Be assured that grief is not a sign of weakness.
It indicates how much your loved one meant to you.
However, is it possible to find a measure of relief from your painful grief?
HOW SOME HAVE COPED
While your pain can seem unending, you may find the following suggestions consoling:
ALLOW YOURSELF TIME TO GRIEVE
Not everyone grieves in the same way or for the same amount of time.
Still, crying can provide an outlet for fragile emotions.
Vanessa, quoted earlier, says: "I would just cry; I needed to release the pain. "
Sofía, whose sister died suddenly, says: "Confronting my thoughts and feelings is very painful, like opening and cleaning an infected wound.
The pain is almost unbearable, but it allows the wound to heal. "
TALK ABOUT YOUR THOUGHTS AND FEELINGS
Understandably, at times you may wish to be alone.
But grief is a heavy burden to carry by yourself.
Seventeen-year-old Jared, who lost his father, recalls: "I talked about my emotions with others.
I doubt I made much sense, but it was good just to be able to express myself. "
Janice, quoted in the opening article, adds another benefit: "Talking with others was tremendously comforting.
I felt understood, and I didn’t feel so alone. "
ACCEPT HELP
One doctor says: "The bereaved who allow friends and relatives to help them through [the] initial period [of shock] tend to continue to move with some ease through the different phases of grief. "
Let your friends know what they can do to help; they likely want to but might not know how.​ Proverbs 17:17.
DRAW CLOSER TO GOD
Tina says: "When I suddenly lost my husband to cancer, I could no longer confide in him, so I would tell God everything!
I started each day asking him to help me get through the day.
God helped me in more ways than I can mention. "
Tarsha, who was 22 years old when her mother died, says: "Bible reading was my daily source of comfort.
It gave me something encouraging to think about. "
VISUALIZE THE RESURRECTION
Tina continues: "Initially, the resurrection hope didn’t comfort me because I needed my husband​ and my boys needed their father ​right then.
However, now, four years later, I cling to this hope.
It’s a lifeline for me.
I imagine seeing him again, and it brings me such peace and joy! "
You are not likely to experience instant relief from your grief.
Nevertheless, Vanessa’s experience can be reassuring.
She says, "You think you’ll never get through it, but you will see brighter days. "
Remember, while the void you feel in your heart may not disappear, life is still worth living.
With God’s tender help, you can still enjoy warm friendships and a purposeful life.
And soon God will resurrect the dead.
He wants you to be able to embrace your loved one again.
Then that pain in your heart will be healed forever!
Bible Verses That Can Help
God cares about your grief and tears.
One Bible writer said to God: "Do collect my tears in your skin bottle.
Are they not recorded in your book? "​ Psalm 56:8.
You can pour out your heart to God.
"Before [God] I tell about my distress . . .
I call to you, O Jehovah, for help. "​ Psalm 142:2, 5.
You can have hope.
"There is going to be a resurrection. "​ Acts 24:15.
God promises to bring back to life countless people who have died, and he yearns to do so. ​ Job 14:14, 15, footnote.
When a Parent Dies
THE CHALLENGE
Dami was six years old when an aneurysm claimed the life of her dad.
Derrick was nine when his father died of heart disease.
Jeannie was seven when her mom passed away after a year-long battle with ovarian cancer.
All too soon, these three young people were confronted with the death of a loved one.
Have you had a similar experience?
If so, this article can help you come to terms with your loss.
First, though, consider a few facts about grieving.
WHAT YOU SHOULD KNOW
There are many ways to grieve.
This means that the way you express your sorrow might differ from the way others do so.
"Coping with a death does not follow a simple pattern or set of rules, " says the book Helping Teens Cope With Death.
The important thing is that you do not unduly suppress your grief.
Because . . .
Suppressing grief can be harmful.
Jeannie, mentioned at the outset, says: "I thought I had to be strong for my little sister, so I buried my emotions.
Even today, I tend to suppress painful feelings, and that’s not healthy. "
Experts would agree.
"Feelings denied or bottled up won’t stay bottled up forever, " says the book The Grieving Teen.
"They will return when you least expect [them to] in the form of emotional flare-ups or physical ailments. "
Suppressed grief can also lead to the abuse of alcohol or drugs, all done in an effort to numb the pain.
Grieving may be accompanied by confusing emotions.
For example, some people feel anger at the person who died, feeling that the person "abandoned " them.
Others blame God, thinking that he should have prevented the death.
Many who grieve feel guilt for things they did or said to the person, since there is now no way to make amends.
Clearly, grieving can be a complex process.
How can you get relief and be helped to move forward?
WHAT YOU CAN DO
Talk to someone.
You might be inclined to isolate yourself during this difficult time.
But pouring out your feelings to a family member or a friend will help you deal with your emotions and keep this tragedy from overwhelming you.
Bible principle: Proverbs 18:24.
Keep a journal.
Write about the parent you lost.
For example, what is your most cherished memory of that person?
Write about his or her commendable qualities.
Which ones would you like to imitate in your life?
If you are plagued with negative thoughts for example, if you cannot stop thinking about something harsh you said to your parent before he or she passed away write down what you feel and why.
For example, "I feel guilty because I had an argument with my dad the day before he died. "
Next, challenge the reasonableness of your guilt.
"You cannot blame yourself for not knowing that there would never be an opportunity to apologize, " says The Grieving Teen.
"To suggest that one must never say or do anything that might call for a future apology is simply not realistic. "
Bible principle: Job 10:1.
Take care of yourself.
Get adequate rest, sufficient exercise, and proper nutrition.
If you do not feel like eating, have a number of healthful snacks throughout the day instead of full meals at least until your appetite returns to normal.
Do not soothe your grief with junk food or alcohol; they will only make things worse.
Talk to God in prayer.
The Bible says: "Throw your burden on Jehovah, and he will sustain you. "
(Psalm 55:22) Prayer is not merely an emotional crutch.
It is real communication with the God who "comforts us in all our trials. " 2 Corinthians 1:3, 4.
One way that God comforts those who mourn is through his Word, the Bible.
Why not examine what it teaches about the true condition of those who have died and the hope of a resurrection?
Bible principle: Psalm 94:19.
KEY SCRIPTURES
"There is a friend who sticks closer than a brother. "
Proverbs 18:24.
"I will speak out in my bitter distress! "
Job 10:1.
"When anxieties overwhelmed me, you [God] comforted and soothed me. "
Psalm 94:19.
YOU CAN HELP OTHERS
"My family and I are Jehovah’s Witnesses. A few years ago, two children we know lost their mother to cancer.
They were 6 and 3 years old virtually the same ages my sister and I were when our dad died nearly 17 years earlier.
"My mom, my younger sister, my brother, and I decided to make ourselves available to this family.
We would invite them over.
We would let them talk when they needed to.
We would spend time with them and be whatever they needed us to be at the moment, whether it was someone to play with them or listen to them or give them advice.
"Losing a parent is devastating, and you never get over it.
It gets easier, but you are constantly reminded of your loss.
I knew what this grieving family was going through, and that’s one reason why I’m glad our family reached out to them.
It helped us to draw closer to them and to each other as well. "
Dami.
When Children Grieve
Are you grieving over the death of a family member?
If so, how can you cope with your loss?
Consider how the Bible helped three young people deal with this very challenge.
DAMI’S STORY
Dami holds a picture of her father
Dami
At first, it seemed to be a simple headache.
But when my dad’s pain got worse, my mom called an ambulance.
I still remember the paramedics taking him away.
Little did I know that it was the last time I would see him alive.
Three days later, my dad died as a result of an aneurysm.
I was just six years old.
For years, I blamed myself for my dad’s death.
In my mind I would replay that scene of the paramedics taking him away, and I would ask myself: ‘Why did I just stand there?
Why didn’t I do something?’
I would look at older ones with health problems and wonder, ‘Why are they alive and my dad isn’t?’
In time, my mom helped me to talk about my emotions.
And as Jehovah’s Witnesses, we had wonderful support from the congregation.
Some people think that you can grieve right after a tragedy and then be over it, but that wasn’t the case with me.
I didn’t really grieve until I was in my early teens.
My advice to young people who have lost a parent in death is, "Talk to someone about what you’re going through.
It may be that the sooner you let your emotions out, the healthier it will be for you. "
Yes, it’s hard to go through milestones in my life and know that my dad isn’t here with me.
But I find comfort in the Bible’s promise at Revelation 21:4, which says that soon God "will wipe out every tear from [our] eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. "
DERRICK’S STORY
Derrick holds a picture of his father
Derrick
Some of the best memories I have are of fishing with my dad and camping with him in the mountains.
He loved the mountains.
My dad had heart problems for some time; I remember visiting him in the hospital once or twice in my early childhood.
But I didn’t understand the severity of his illness.
My dad died of heart disease when I was nine years old.
After he died, I cried and cried.
I felt as if I were suffocating, and I didn’t want to talk to anyone.
I hadn’t felt this bad in my whole life, and I didn’t feel like doing anything anymore.
The church youth group I was part of showed interest in me initially, but it quickly faded.
People there would say things like this, "It was your father’s time " or "God called him " or "He’s in heaven now. "
Those answers never really satisfied me, but I had no knowledge of what the Bible really teaches about those things.
Then my mom started studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses, and later my brother and I joined her.
We learned about the condition of the dead as well as God’s comforting promise of a resurrection.
(John 5:28, 29) But the scripture that helped me the most was Isaiah 41:10, where God says: "Do not be afraid, for I am with you.
Do not be anxious, for I am your God.
I will fortify you, yes, I will help you. "
Knowing that Jehovah was with me was a tremendous comfort during my grieving, and it still is.
JEANNIE’S STORY
Jeannie holds a picture of her mother
Jeannie
When I was seven years old, my mom died of cancer.
That whole day seemed surreal.
I recall that she died at home and that my grandparents were there.
I remember that everyone was calm.
I remember that we had scrambled eggs for dinner.
I felt as if my whole life were turning upside down in slow motion.
At the time and for years after that I thought I had to be strong for my little sister, so I buried my emotions.
Even today, I tend to suppress painful feelings, and that’s not healthy.
I remember the love and support we had from the local congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Even though we had just started attending meetings at the Kingdom Hall, fellow believers rallied around us as if we had been family for years.
I don’t think my dad had to cook dinner for an entire year because it was always waiting by the front door.
One scripture that stands out to me is Psalm 25:16, 17.
There the psalmist implored God: "Turn your face to me and show me favor, for I am alone and helpless.
The distresses of my heart have multiplied; free me from my anguish. "
It is comforting for me to know that you are never really alone when you are sad.
God is there for you.
With help from the Bible, I have been able to move forward with my life and focus on positive things, such as the Bible’s comforting promise of a resurrection.
I have hope of seeing my mother again and getting to know her in perfect health on a paradise earth.
2 Peter 3:13.
Would you like to learn more about the Bible’s comforting message for those who are grieving? Download a free copy of the publication "When Someone You Love Dies. "
Go to www.jw.org, and look under PUBLICATIONS > BOOKS & BROCHURES.
When Your Child Asks About Death
Your six-year-old asks, "Are you going to die someday? "
Startled by his question, you wonder: ‘Is my child old enough to understand the answer?
How can I talk to him about death?’
Children do think about death.
Some even play games in which someone pretends to die.
Therefore, death should not be considered a taboo subject, and you should welcome any questions your child may have about it.
By occasionally talking openly about death, you help your child learn how to cope with the loss of a loved one.
Talking about death will not cause your child to have morbid thoughts.
Rather, it will help him alleviate fears.
However, you may need to correct some misunderstandings.
For example, some experts say that many children under the age of six do not view death as final.
In their games, a child will be "dead " one moment and "alive " the next.
When they get a little older, however, children begin to grasp the seriousness of death a fact that may cause them to have questions, concerns, or even fears, especially if a loved one has died.
Therefore, it is vital that you discuss the subject.
Mental-health expert Marion Haza points out: "A child will develop anxieties related to death if he feels that he is not allowed to talk about this subject at home. "
You need not worry excessively about what to say.
According to one study, children just want to "hear the truth expressed in kind words. "
Be assured that a child will usually not ask a question unless he is ready to hear the answer.
Take advantage of opportunities to talk about death.
If your child sees a dead bird on the side of the road or if a beloved pet dies, use simple questions to encourage him to talk.
For example, you could ask: "Does a dead animal suffer?
Is it cold or hungry?
How do you know that an animal or a person is dead? "
Bible principle: Ecclesiastes 3:1, 7.
Do not hide the truth.
When an acquaintance or a relative has died, avoid using confusing euphemisms such as "He has gone away. "
Your child might wrongly conclude that the deceased will soon return home.
Instead, use simple and direct words.
For example, you might say: "When Grandma died, her body stopped working.
We can’t talk to her, but we will never forget her. "
Bible principle: Ephesians 4:25.
Since a young child might think that death is contagious, assure him that he is safe
Reassure your child.
He might think that his actions or thoughts caused someone’s death.
Instead of just saying that he is not responsible for what happened, you could ask, "What makes you think that it is your fault? "
Listen carefully, without belittling his feelings.
Also, since a young child might think that death is contagious, assure him that he is safe.
Draw out your child.
Talk freely about loved ones who have died, including relatives whom your child has never met.
You might evoke fond memories of an aunt, an uncle, or a grandparent and relate amusing anecdotes.
When you openly discuss such people, you help your child understand that he need not avoid talking or thinking about them.
At the same time, do not force your child to talk.
You can always broach the subject later, when you feel the time is right.
Bible principle: Proverbs 20:5.
Chapters 34 and 35 of the book Learn From the Great Teacher can help your children learn what the Bible teaches about death.
Look under PUBLICATIONS > BOOKS & BROCHURES
"There is . . . a time to be silent and a time to speak. "
Ecclesiastes 3:1, 7.
"Each one of you speak truth. "
Ephesians 4:25.
"The thoughts of a man’s heart are like deep waters, but the discerning man draws them out. "
Proverbs 20:5.
IMPORTANT POINTS TO CONVEY
If a loved one has died, you can help your child overcome inordinate fears about death by making sure he understands the following:
He is not going to die.
If something happens to you, he will not be abandoned; relatives will look after him.
Once dead, a person is no longer suffering.
The deceased person will not be forgotten.
You might say, "You cannot see Grandma anymore, but you can keep memories of her in your heart. "
Remember, saying nothing to your child will not reduce his anxiety.
On the contrary, it may only serve to give his imagination free rein.
Hope for the Dead​ How Can You Be Sure?
Is it naive to think that the dead will live again?
The apostle Paul did not think so.
He wrote under inspiration: "If in this life only we have hoped in Christ, we are to be pitied more than anyone.
But now Christ has been raised from the dead, the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep in death. " (1 Corinthians 15:19, 20) Paul saw the resurrection as a certainty.
It was, in effect, guaranteed by the resurrection of Jesus himself.
(Acts 17:31) That is why Paul called Jesus "the firstfruits "​ he was the first one raised to eternal life.
If Jesus was first, then logically there would be others.
A woman holds her Bible open and confidently gazes ahead
Job said to God: "You will long for the work of your hands. "​ Job 14:14, 15
Here is another reason you can be sure of the resurrection hope. Jehovah is the God of truth.
"God . . . cannot lie. "
(Titus 1:2) Jehovah has never lied, and he never will.
Would he hold out the resurrection hope, even demonstrating that he can fulfill it, and then turn his promises into lies?
The very notion is absurd!
Why has Jehovah arranged for the future resurrection?
Because of his love.
"If a man dies, can he live again? " asked Job.
"You will call, and I will answer you.
You will long for the work of your hands. "
(Job 14:14, 15) Job was convinced that his loving heavenly Father would yearn to resurrect him.
Has God changed?
"I am Jehovah; I do not change. "
(Malachi 3:6) God still longs to see the dead brought back to life healthy and happy.
This is just as any loving parent would wish after losing a child in death.
The difference, of course, is that God has the power to do as he wishes.​ Psalm 135:6.
Death is a terrible problem, but God has the perfect solution
Jehovah will empower his Son to bring unbounded joy to those who have mourned the loss of loved ones.
And how does Jesus feel about the resurrection?
Before raising Lazarus to life, Jesus observed the anguish of Lazarus’ sisters and friends, and he "gave way to tears " himself.
(John 11:35) On another occasion, Jesus encountered the widow of Nain, who had lost her only son in death.
Jesus "was moved with pity for her, and he said to her: ‘Stop weeping.’
" Immediately he raised her son.
(Luke 7:13) So Jesus feels deeply about grief and death.
How delighted he will be when he will turn sorrow into elation all over the world!
A man embraces his little girl
Have you been touched by grief?
You might feel that death is a problem that has no solution.
But there is a solution​ namely, the resurrection that God will carry out by means of his Son.
Remember that God wants you to see that solution.
He wants you to be there to embrace your loved ones again.
Imagine planning together for an everlasting future, never again to say good-bye!
Lionel, quoted earlier, reflects: "Eventually, I learned about the resurrection.
At first, it was hard to believe, and I did not trust the person who told me about it.
But I checked it out in the Bible and found it was true!
I can hardly wait to see my grandfather again. "
Would you like to know more?
Jehovah’s Witnesses would be delighted to show you in your own Bible why they are convinced of the future resurrection.
What Hope Is There for the Dead?
What is the good news about the dead?
The resurrected Lazarus is welcomed back by his sisters Martha and Mary
When Jesus arrived at Bethany near Jerusalem, his friend Lazarus had been dead for four days.
Jesus went to the burial place with Martha and Mary, sisters of the deceased man.
Soon, a crowd gathered.
Can you imagine the joy of Martha and Mary when Jesus raised Lazarus back to life?​ Read John 11:21-24, 38-44.
Martha was already aware of the good news about the dead.
She knew that Jehovah will resurrect the dead to live on earth again.​ Read Job 14:14, 15.
What is the condition of the dead?
Adam’s creation, and later his death
God told Adam: "Dust you are and to dust you will return. "​ GENESIS 3:19.
Humans are made from dust.
(Genesis 2:7; 3:19) We are not spirits living in a body of flesh.
We are physical creatures, so no part of us survives death.
When we die, our brain dies too, and our thoughts perish.
Thus, Lazarus said nothing about his experience of death because the dead are unconscious.​ Read Psalm 146:4; Ecclesiastes 9:5, 6, 10.
Does God torment people with fire after death?
Since the Bible shows that the dead are unconscious, hellfire is clearly a false teaching that slanders God.
The very idea of tormenting people with fire disgusts him.​ Read Jeremiah 7:31.
Watch the video What Is the Condition of the Dead?
Can the dead speak to us?
The dead can neither speak nor hear.
(Psalm 115:17) But some angels are wicked, and they may speak to people and pretend to be dead humans.
(2 Peter 2:4) Jehovah forbids trying to inquire of the dead.​ Read Deuteronomy 18:10, 11.
Who will return to life?
A man who was resurrected back to life in Paradise learns about God.
Then the man helps teach others who are resurrected.
Many millions of people who are dead in the grave will return to life on earth.
Even some who did not know God and who practiced bad things will be resurrected.​ Read Luke 23:43; Acts 24:15.
Resurrected ones will be able to learn the truth about God and to exercise faith in Jesus by obeying him.
(Revelation 20:11-13) Those who return to life and do good things will be able to enjoy life forever on earth.​ Read John 5:28, 29.
What does the resurrection tell us about Jehovah?
God made hope for the dead possible by sending his Son to die for us.
So the resurrection tells us about Jehovah’s love and undeserved kindness.
When the dead return to life, whom do you especially want to see?​ Read John 3:16; Romans 6:23.
The Best Help for Those Who Grieve
THE PAIN OF LOSING A LOVED ONE IN DEATH HAS BEEN THE SUBJECT OF MUCH RESEARCH IN RECENT TIMES.
Yet, as demonstrated previously, the best expert advice often harmonizes with the ancient wisdom found in the Bible.
This speaks well of the timelessness of the Bible’s guidance.
The Bible, however, contains more than dependable advice.
It provides information found nowhere else, which can bring immeasurable comfort to those who grieve.
Assurance that our dead loved ones are not suffering
"The dead know nothing, " says the Bible at Ecclesiastes 9:5.
Their "thoughts perish. "
(Psalm 146:4) Consistent with this, the Bible likens death to peaceful sleep.​ John 11:11.
A strong belief in a loving God brings comfort
The Bible says at Psalm 34:15: "The eyes of Jehovah are on the righteous, and his ears listen to their cry for help. "
Expressing our feelings in prayer to God is more than good therapy or a means of organizing our thoughts.
It actually helps us to establish a personal relationship with our Creator, who can use his power to comfort us.
A better future to look forward to
Imagine a time in the future when those in the grave will be brought back to life here on earth!
The Bible repeatedly speaks of such a time.
Describing what conditions on earth will then be like, the Bible states that God "will wipe out every tear from [our] eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. "​ Revelation 21:3, 4.
Many who believe in Jehovah, the God of the Bible, are significantly empowered to cope with grief by embracing the hope of seeing their dead loved ones again.
For example, Ann, who lost her husband of 65 years, says: "The Bible assures me that our dead loved ones are not suffering and that God will resurrect all who are in his memory.
These thoughts come to the surface whenever I think of my loss, and as a result, I am actually able to cope with the worst thing that has ever happened to me! "
Tiina, mentioned earlier in this series of articles, says: "Since the day Timo died, I have felt God’s support.
I have strongly felt Jehovah’s helping hand in my time of distress.
And the Bible’s promise of a resurrection is very real to me.
It strengthens me to keep going until the day when I will see Timo again. "
These sentiments echo those of millions of people who are convinced of the Bible’s reliability.
Even if you feel that the Bible’s claims are unreal or just a dream, you owe it to yourself to investigate the evidence that its counsel and promises are sound.
You just might find the Bible to be the best help for those who grieve.
LEARN MORE ABOUT THE HOPE FOR THE DEAD
Watch related videos on our website, jw.org
People in Paradise are ready to welcome back loved ones in the resurrection
The Bible promises a future when we will welcome back loved ones who have died
WHAT IS THE CONDITION OF THE DEAD?
What Is the Condition of the Dead?
What happens to us when we die?
The Bible’s clear answer is comforting and reassuring
Look under PUBLICATIONS > VIDEOS (Video Category: The Bible)
WOULD YOU LIKE GOOD NEWS?
Would You Like Good News?
With so much bad news, where can you find good news?
This video introduces the brochure Good News From God!
Look under PUBLICATIONS > VIDEOS (Video Category: Our Meetings and Ministry)
When Disaster Strikes​ Steps That Can Save Lives
"A deafening explosion nearly threw me to the floor.
Smoke came from the air vents, and our high-rise office erupted in flames. "​ Joshua.
Earthquake . . . hurricane . . . terrorist attack . . . school shooting. Those terms appear in the headlines too often.
Of course, it is one thing to read about a disaster; it is another to live through one.
What can you do before, during, and after a disaster to improve the likelihood of your survival?
BEFORE​ PREPARE!
NO ONE is immune to disaster.
Preparation is your most important key to survival.
But what does preparation involve?
Prepare mentally.
Acknowledge the fact that disasters happen and that you and your loved ones are potentially at risk.
It is too late to prepare after disaster strikes.
Learn about disasters that can happen in your area.
Know where shelters are.
Consider whether the construction of your home and its location are as safe as possible.
Remove fire hazards.
Install smoke detectors, and change their batteries at least once a year, if not more often.
Prepare emergency supplies.
Power, water, phone, and transportation services can fail.
If you own a car, try to keep the fuel tank at least half full, and always have food, water, and an emergency kit in your home.​ See the box " Do You Have What You Need? "
A family prepares emergency supplies
Preparation is your most important key to survival
Have access to the phone numbers of friends, both near and far.
Make and rehearse an escape plan.
Know the nearest exits in your building, as well as the emergency plan of your children’s school.
Set up family meeting places​ such as a school or a library ​one nearby and another outside your neighborhood.
Authorities recommend that you practice walking with your family to those meeting points.
Plan to help others, including the elderly and the infirm.
DURING​ ACT QUICKLY
"When fire broke out, most people didn’t panic​ they delayed, " relates Joshua, quoted at the outset.
"Some turned off a computer or filled a water bottle.
One man said, ‘Maybe we should just wait.’
" Despite the hesitancy of others, Joshua shouted: "We need to get out of here now! "
At that, his coworkers snapped out of denial and followed him down the stairs.
"If anyone falls, pick him up and keep moving, " Joshua kept calling out. "We’re all going to make it! "
In a fire.
Stay close to the floor, and move quickly to the nearest exit.
Smoke makes it hard to see, and most fire deaths are caused by smoke inhalation.
Leave behind personal items.
Seconds can make the difference between life and death.
In an earthquake.
Get under sturdy furniture or next to an inside wall.
Expect aftershocks, and get outside and away from buildings as soon as you can.
Trained rescuers may not arrive for hours, so try to rescue others if you can.
In a tsunami.
If the water suddenly rushes away from the shore, move quickly to higher ground.
Expect more and larger waves.
In a tornado or a hurricane.
Go to a storm shelter without delay.
In a flood.
Stay out of flooded buildings.
Avoid wading in or driving through water.
Floodwater can contain sewage and conceal dangers, including debris, open manholes, and downed power lines.
Two feet [0.6 m] of moving water can carry a car away.
Most deaths in a flood result when people try to drive through moving water.
If the authorities order evacuation, leave immediately!
Let friends know where you are, or they may risk their lives looking for you.
A family listens to a radio
If authorities order evacuation, leave immediately!
Text messaging may be more reliable than telephone voice service.
If the authorities direct residents to remain at home or shelter in place, stay inside.
In case of an outdoor chemical, biological, or nuclear accident or attack, stay indoors, turn off ventilation, and seal all doors and windows. In a nuclear event, go to the lowest internal part of your building to reduce exposure to radiation.
Listen to local TV or radio news.
Stay indoors until authorities announce that the threat has passed.
AFTER​ STAY SAFE!
To avoid disease and danger, consider the following recommendations:
Stay with friends, if possible, rather than in a camp.
Keep your living space sanitary.
Use personal protective equipment when cleaning up debris.
If possible, wear gloves, sturdy shoes, a hard hat, and a dust mask.
Beware of electrical wires and hidden embers.
Keep your daily routine as normal as possible.
Your children need to see that you are calm and hopeful.
Do school lessons, play, and worship as a family.
Do not dwell on news coverage of the tragedy, and do not take out your anxiety or frustration on family members.
Accept help, and help others.
A family sticks to their routine after a disaster
After the disaster, keep your routine as normal as possible
Acknowledge that disasters cause loss.
Government and other relief efforts focus on helping people to survive, not on replacing everything that was lost.
To survive, we need clean water, food, clothing, and shelter from the weather.​ 1 Timothy 6:7, 8.
Recognize and address emotional injury.
This often surfaces after the initial shock has passed.
Symptoms include anxiety, depression, and mood swings, as well as difficulty thinking, working, and sleeping.
Talk to caring friends.
Although Joshua survived the fire in his workplace, many of his acquaintances did not.
He received assistance from Christian elders and mental-health professionals.
"They assured me that my grief was part of a natural healing process and that it would pass, " Joshua says.
"After six months, the nightmares lessened.
Other symptoms have lasted longer. "
Disasters assault our very sense of justice.
In response, some people mistakenly blame God.
Many, like Joshua, experience "survivor’s guilt. "
"I still wonder if I could have saved more people, " he says.
"I am comforted by my belief that God will soon bring complete justice to the earth and will right all wrongs.
In the meantime, I cherish each day of life and do what I reasonably can to preserve it. "​ Revelation 21:4, 5.
DO YOU HAVE WHAT YOU NEED?
Emergency supplies
Disaster management organizations urge families to store and annually update emergency supplies.
Of course, needs will vary according to your location and circumstances, so check with local emergency management services for recommendations that could be applied in your area.
In general it is recommended that you keep at least three gallons (11 L) of water per person and three days of nonperishable, ready-to-eat foods.
Also, some families have prepared "go bags " with such items as the following:
Blankets, complete change of warm clothes, and sturdy shoes
Flashlight, radio (battery or windup), and spare batteries
First-aid kit and a whistle to signal for help
Eating utensils, can opener, pocket tool set, and waterproof matches
Dust masks, waterproof tape, and plastic sheeting for shelter
Toothbrushes, soap, towels, and toilet paper
Child-care supplies and special-needs items for seniors or the disabled
A waterproof container with needed medication, copies of prescriptions, and other important documents
List of emergency contacts and meeting places and a local map
Credit cards and cash
Extra set of house keys and car keys
Paper, pencils, books, and games for children
Bible
When Disaster Strikes
"Our first feeling was total despair.
Everything we owned had been destroyed by a mudslide and flooding. "​ Andrew, Sierra Leone.
"After the hurricane, we returned to our home.
Nothing was left.
We were speechless.
My daughter dropped to her knees and wept. "​ David, Virgin Islands.
IF YOU have ever survived a disaster, you may understand what other survivors have experienced: shock, denial, confusion, anxiety, and nightmares.
Many disheartened and fatigued survivors have little motivation to move on in life.
If your life has been devastated by a disaster, you too may feel that you are near the breaking point.
You may even begin to feel that your life is not worth living.
However, the Bible explains that your life is worth living and that you can have a firm basis for hope in a better future.
KNOWING BIBLE TRUTH MAKES LIFE WORTH LIVING
Ecclesiastes 7:8 says: "Better is the end of a matter than its beginning. "
When you are just beginning to recover from a disaster, life may seem hopeless.
But as you patiently work at rebuilding your life, things can get better.
The Bible foretells a time when "no more will there be heard . . . the sound of weeping or a cry of distress. "
(Isaiah 65:19) This will be true when the earth is transformed into a paradise under God’s Kingdom.
(Psalm 37:11, 29) Disasters will be a thing of the past.
Any painful memories and lingering trauma will be wiped out forever, because Almighty God promises: "The former things will not be called to mind, nor will they come up into the heart. "​ Isaiah 65:17.
Just think: The Creator has arranged "to give you a future and a hope "​ a peaceful life under God’s perfect rulership.
(Jeremiah 29:11) Can having knowledge of this truth help make your life worth living?
Sally, quoted in the opening article, states, "Reminding yourself of all the wonderful things that God’s Kingdom is going to do for us in the future can help you let go of the past and get through the present. "
Why not learn more about what God’s Kingdom will soon do for mankind?
Doing so can assure you that despite the disaster you have suffered, your life is worth living now as you eagerly await a disaster-free future.
In the meantime, the Bible provides practical guidance that can help you to cope with the aftermath of a disaster.
Consider a few examples.
Get needed rest.
"Better is a handful of rest than two handfuls of hard work and chasing after the wind. "​ Ecclesiastes 4:6.
Researchers report that after a traumatic experience, "a lack of quality sleep . . . can exacerbate your trauma symptoms and make it harder to maintain your emotional balance. "
Therefore, it is wise to get sufficient rest.
Discuss your feelings.
"Anxiety in a man’s heart weighs it down [or, "depresses him, " footnote], but a good word cheers it up. "​ Proverbs 12:25.
Confide in a family member or trusted friend.
In addition to providing a listening ear, family members or close friends can provide words of encouragement and give practical help.
Look ahead to better times.
"There are new heavens and a new earth that we are awaiting according to [God’s] promise, and in these righteousness is to dwell. "​ 2 Peter 3:13.
What Does the Bible Say About Natural Disasters?
God does not cause the natural disasters occurring today, but he is concerned about people who are affected by them.
Natural disasters are one of the causes of suffering that God’s Kingdom will eliminate.
In the meantime, God provides comfort for those who are affected by natural disasters.​ 2 Corinthians 1:3.
Why can we be sure that natural disasters are not punishment from God?
Are natural disasters a sign of the times?
How does God help victims of natural disasters?
Can the Bible help with natural-disaster preparedness?
Bible verses to comfort victims of natural disasters
Why can we be sure that natural disasters are not punishment from God?
Natural disasters differ from God’s use of natural forces, as recorded in the Bible.
Natural disasters kill and maim indiscriminately.
In contrast, God’s acts of judgment recorded in the Bible were selective.
For example, when God destroyed the ancient cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, he spared the good man Lot and his two daughters.
(Genesis 19:29, 30) God read the hearts of the individuals of that time and destroyed only those he deemed wicked.​ Genesis 18:23-​32; 1 Samuel 16:7.
On the other hand, God gave warnings to the wicked before using natural forces against them.
How?
By damaging the natural environment and by building in areas prone to earthquakes, floods, and extreme weather.
(Revelation 11:18) God is not to blame for such human choices.​ Proverbs 19:3.
Are natural disasters a sign of the times?
Yes, Bible prophecies suggest that there would be disasters during "the conclusion of the system of things, " or "the last days. "
(Matthew 24:3; 2 Timothy 3:1) For example, concerning our time, Jesus said: "There will be food shortages and earthquakes in one place after another. "
(Matthew 24:7) Soon, God will rid the earth of all causes of pain and suffering, including natural disasters.​ Revelation 21:​3, 4.
How does God help victims of natural disasters?
God comforts victims with his Word, the Bible.
The Bible assures us that God cares for us and that he feels for us when we suffer.
(Isaiah 63:9; 1 Peter 5:​6, 7) It also reveals his promise of a time when natural disasters will not happen anymore.​ See " Bible verses to comfort victims of natural disasters. "
God helps victims by means of his worshippers.
God uses his worshippers on earth to imitate the example set by Jesus.
It was prophesied that Jesus would comfort "the brokenhearted " and "all who mourn. "
(Isaiah 61:​1, 2) Worshippers of God strive to do the same.​ John 13:15.
God also uses his worshippers to provide practical relief to victims of natural disasters.​ Acts 11:28-30; Galatians 6:​10.
Jehovah’s Witnesses repair a home in Puerto Rico
Jehovah’s Witnesses providing practical relief to hurricane victims in Puerto Rico
Can the Bible help with natural-disaster preparedness?
Although the Bible is not a manual for disaster preparedness, it contains principles that can help.
For example:
Plan ahead for potential disasters.
"The shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself, " says the Bible.
(Proverbs 22:3) We are wise to prepare an emergency plan in advance.
Such planning may include assembling an emergency kit that is ready to go in case of an emergency and rehearsing with one’s family where to meet if a disaster occurs.
Value life over possessions.
The Bible acknowledges: "We have brought nothing into the world, and neither can we carry anything out. " (1 Timothy 6:​7, 8) We need to be willing to leave our home and possessions in order to escape disaster.
We do well to remember that our life is more important than any material things.​ Matthew 6:​25.
Bible verses to comfort victims of natural disasters
Genesis 18:25: "It is unthinkable that [God] would act in this manner by putting the righteous man to death with the wicked one . . .
Will the Judge of all the earth not do what is right? "
Meaning: God always does what is right; he is not to blame when good people die because of natural disasters.
Psalm 46:​1, 2: "God is our refuge and strength, a help that is readily found in times of distress.
That is why we will not fear, though the earth undergoes change. "
Meaning: No matter what may happen around us, God is a reliable Source of strength.
Isaiah 63:9: "During all their distress it was distressing to him. "
Meaning: God has empathy​ he feels for us when we suffer.
John 5:​28, 29: "The hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear [Jesus’] voice and come out. "
Meaning: We can have the hope of seeing our dead loved ones again because God will empower Jesus to bring them back to life.
1 Peter 5:​6, 7: "Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty hand of God . . . while you throw all your anxiety on him, because he cares for you. "
Meaning: God has deep concern for us and wants us to pray to him about our anxieties.
Revelation 21:4: "[God] will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.
Meaning: God will eliminate all causes of suffering, including natural disasters.
Health
Does God care about how we treat our bodies?
"Do not come to be among heavy drinkers of wine, among those who are gluttonous eaters of flesh. "
Proverbs 23:20.
WHY DOES IT MATTER?
The Bible is not a medical textbook; nor does it regulate every aspect of human behavior.
Still, you can benefit from understanding God’s view of health as expressed in the Bible.
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS
Numerous Bible passages shed light on how God feels about the way we treat our bodies.
For instance, the Bible condemns harmful excesses, including drunkenness and gluttony.
(Proverbs 23:20) God’s Law code given to ancient Israel included measures that would control and in some cases even prevent diseases.
The Law also incorporated specific safety regulations for the prevention of injuries.
(Deuteronomy 22:8) Clearly, the Bible encourages us to take care of our bodies and take reasonable measures to protect our health.
According to the Bible, why do we get sick?
"Through one man sin entered into the world and death through sin. "
Romans 5:12.
WHAT PEOPLE SAY
Many believe that sickness is simply a quirk of human evolution.
Others think that mysterious forces, such as evil spirits, are the cause of our health problems.
According to the Bible, we get sick as a result of the first human rebellion against God.
(Romans 5:12) Before their rebellion, our first parents, Adam and Eve, enjoyed perfect health.
They knew that they would die if they withdrew from God’s loving care.
(Genesis 2:16, 17) Still, they willfully severed their friendship with God and lost their perfection.
The flawed nature of our rebellious first human parents has been passed on to us.
Hence, despite all efforts to eliminate human maladies, we still get sick.
WHAT CAN YOU DO?
The Bible teaches that if you become reconciled to God by obeying his wise principles, you will eventually enjoy perfect health in an earthly paradise.
(Isaiah 33:24) God promises to eliminate pain, sickness, and death.
Does the Bible discourage medical treatment?
"Persons in health do not need a physician, but the ailing do. "
Matthew 9:12.
Some promote spiritual healing (also known as faith healing) over medical treatment.
God allowed health-care practitioners to operate among his people in Bible times.
(Genesis 38:28; Colossians 4:14) There is nothing in the Bible that would indicate that God was displeased with their use of medicinal plants, ointments, prescribed diets, and other health treatments.
In fact, Jesus acknowledged that "persons in health do not need a physician, but the ailing do. "
Yet, the Bible does not endorse the pursuit of health at all costs.
For instance, the Bible does not endorse the modern-day practice of faith healing.
And cures that involve spiritistic practices are not approved by God.
(Galatians 5:19-21) Aside from practices that the Bible condemns, the sensible thing to do when faced with infirmities would be to seek appropriate health care promptly, if it is available.
Ways to Improve Your Health
WHO wants to be sick?
At the very least, an illness is an inconvenience and an expense.
You not only feel bad, but when you are sick, you may not be able to go to work or school, earn any money, or look after your family.
You may even need someone to look after you, and you may have to pay for expensive medicines and treatment.
Well has it been said that "Prevention is better than cure. "
Some illnesses cannot be avoided.
Still, there is much you can do to slow down or even prevent the onset of illness.
Consider five things that you can do today to get on the road to better health.
1 PRACTICE GOOD HYGIENE
Items used for good physical and dental hygiene
According to the Mayo Clinic, "one of the best ways to avoid getting sick and spreading illness " is to wash your hands.
One of the easiest ways to catch a cold or influenza is to rub your nose or your eyes when your hands have been contaminated by germs.
Your best defense against such contamination is to wash your hands regularly.
Good hygiene can also prevent the spread of more serious conditions, such as pneumonia and diarrheal diseases, which every year cause the death of over two million children under the age of five.
Even the spread of deadly Ebola can be minimized by the simple habit of washing hands.
There are certain times when hand washing is particularly important to protect your own health and that of others.
You should wash your hands:
After using the toilet.
After changing diapers or helping a child to use the toilet.
Before and after treating a wound or a cut.
Before and after being with someone who is sick.
Before preparing, serving, or eating food.
After sneezing, coughing, or blowing your nose.
After touching an animal or animal waste.
After handling garbage.
And do not take it for granted that you are cleaning your hands properly.
Studies have shown that a large percentage of those who use public toilets do not wash their hands afterward or do not wash them correctly.
How should you wash your hands?
Wet your hands in clean running water and apply soap.
Rub your hands together to make a lather, not forgetting to clean your nails, your thumbs, the backs of your hands, and between your fingers.
Keep rubbing for at least 20 seconds.
Rinse in clean running water.
Dry with a clean cloth or a paper towel.
Such measures are simple but can avert illness and save lives.
2 USE A SAFE WATER SUPPLY
A glass of clean water and pieces of lemon
Obtaining sufficient clean water for one’s family is a regular chore in some countries.
Yet, access to clean water can become a concern in any part of the world when a main supply that is usually good to drink becomes contaminated as a result of a flood, a storm, a pipe break, or some other issue.
If water does not come from a safe source or is not stored correctly, it can cause parasite infestation, as well as cholera, life-threatening diarrhea, typhoid, hepatitis, and other infections.
Unsafe drinking water is one of the causes of an estimated 1.7 billion cases of diarrheal disease every year.
There is much you can do to slow down or prevent the onset of illness
Cholera is most often contracted when a person drinks water or eats food that is contaminated with fecal matter from infected people.
What steps can you take to protect yourself, even in the immediate aftermath of a disaster, from this and other types of water contamination?
Ensure that all your drinking water including the water used for brushing teeth, making ice, washing food and dishes, or cooking comes from a safe source, such as an adequately treated public supply or sealed bottles from a reputable firm.
If there is any possibility that your piped supply has been contaminated, boil your water before use or treat it with an appropriate chemical product.
When using chemicals, such as chlorine or water-purifying tablets, follow the maker’s directions carefully.
Use quality water filters, if available and affordable.
If no water-treatment products are available, add household bleach, eight drops per gallon of water (two drops per liter), mix well, and then let the water stand for 30 minutes before using it.
Always store treated water in clean, covered containers to protect it from possible recontamination.
Ensure that any vessel used to take water from your stored supply, such as a ladle, is clean.
Handle water containers with clean hands, and do not dip your hands or fingers into water used for drinking.
3 WATCH WHAT YOU EAT
A variety of wholesome foods from different food groups
Good health is impossible without good nutrition, and for good nutrition you need a healthy, balanced diet.
You may need to consider your intake of salt, fats, and sugar, and you should watch your portion sizes.
Include fruits and vegetables in your diet, and vary what you eat.
Reading the packaging will help you to select whole-grain foods when buying bread, cereals, pasta, or rice.
These are richer in nutrients and fiber than the alternatives made from refined grain.
As for proteins, eat small and lean portions of meat and poultry and try to eat fish a couple of times a week, if possible.
In some lands it is also possible to find protein-rich foods from vegetable sources.
If you eat too many sugars and solid fats, you risk becoming overweight.
To minimize this risk, drink water instead of sweet beverages.
Eat more fruit instead of sugary desserts.
Limit your intake of solid fats from such items as sausages, meat, butter, cakes, cheese, and cookies.
And instead of using solid fats for cooking, you may want to use healthier oils.
Too much salt, or sodium, in the diet can raise your blood pressure to an unhealthy level.
If this is your problem, use the information on food packaging to keep your sodium intake low.
Instead of salt, use herbs and spices to flavor your meals.
How much you eat can be as important as what you eat.
So, while enjoying your food, do not keep eating after you are no longer hungry.
An issue tied to nutrition is the risk of food poisoning.
Any food can poison you if it is not prepared and stored properly.
Every year, 1 out of every 6 Americans falls sick from food poisoning.
Most recover without lasting ill effects, but some die from it.
What can you do to minimize the risk?
Vegetables grow in soil that may have been treated with manure, so wash these items carefully before preparing them.
Wash your hands, cutting board, utensils, dishes, and countertops with hot, soapy water before preparing each item.
To avoid cross-contamination, never put food on a surface or plate that was previously in contact with raw eggs, poultry, meat, or fish, without first washing that surface.
Cook until the food reaches the right temperature, and promptly refrigerate any perishable items that are not going to be eaten immediately.
Discard perishable items left at room temperature for more than two hours or one hour if air temperature exceeds 90 degrees Fahrenheit (32°C).
4 STAY PHYSICALLY ACTIVE
A soccer ball and a pair of soccer shoes
Regardless of your age, you need regular physical activity to stay in good shape.
Many people today do not exercise enough.
Why is exercise important?
Staying physically active can help you to:
Sleep well.
Stay mobile.
Maintain strong bones and muscles.
Maintain or achieve a healthy weight.
Lower your risk of suffering from depression.
Lower your risk of premature death.
If you do not stay physically active, you are more likely to:
Suffer from heart disease.
Suffer from type 2 diabetes.
Develop high blood pressure.
Develop high cholesterol.
Suffer a stroke.
The kind of physical activity that is right for you depends on your age and your health, so it would be wise to consult your doctor before beginning any new exercise program.
According to various recommendations, children and adolescents should get at least 60 minutes of moderate-to-vigorous activity every day.
Adults should get 150 minutes of moderate activity or 75 minutes of vigorous activity every week.
Choose an activity that is fun.
You might consider basketball, tennis, soccer, brisk walking, cycling, gardening, chopping wood, swimming, canoeing, jogging, or other aerobic exercise.
How can you tell whether an activity is moderate or vigorous?
A general guide would be that moderate activity makes you sweat, but more vigorous exercise makes it hard for you to hold a conversation while doing it.
5 GET ENOUGH SLEEP
A quiet and relaxing bedroom
The amount of sleep needed varies from person to person.
Most newborns sleep for 16 to 18 hours a day, toddlers about 14 hours, and preschoolers about 11 or 12.
School-age children generally need at least 10 hours of sleep, adolescents perhaps 9 or 10, and adults from 7 to 8.
Getting the right amount of rest should not be considered optional.
According to experts, sufficient sleep is important for:
Growth and development in children and teenagers.
Learning and retention of new information.
Maintaining the right balance of hormones that impact metabolism and weight.
Cardiovascular health.
Disease prevention.
Insufficient sleep has been linked to obesity, depression, heart disease, diabetes, and tragic accidents.
Surely these give us good reason to want to get enough rest.
So, what can you do if you realize that you have a problem getting enough sleep?
Try to go to bed and get up at the same time every day.
Make your bedroom quiet, dark, relaxing, and neither too warm nor too cold.
Do not watch TV or use gadgets while in bed.
Make your bed as comfortable as possible.
Avoid heavy meals, caffeine, and alcohol before bedtime.
If after applying these suggestions you still suffer from insomnia or other sleep disorders such as excessive daytime sleepiness or gasping for breath while sleeping you may want to consult a qualified health-care professional.
SAFEGUARD YOUR HEALTH!
Your health is affected by realities over which you have no control such as economic conditions, the availability of resources, and so on.
In all likelihood, however, it should be within your means to adopt at least some of the suggestions given in the foregoing article.
As a wise man of ancient times put it, "the shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself. "
Proverbs 22:3.
Readers of the Holy Scriptures are comforted by the trustworthy promise that one day soon, "no resident will say: ‘I am sick.’ " (Isaiah 33:24) In the meantime, do all you can to safeguard your health and that of your loved ones.
Disease How to Reduce the Risk
Every day your body wages war against enemies that are silent and unseen but potentially deadly.
Foreign invaders, such as bacteria, viruses, and parasites, threaten your health.
You are not likely to be aware of those battles because your immune system repels or destroys most of the invaders before the onset of symptoms.
Sometimes, however, the harmful germs gain the upper hand.
If so, you may need to bolster your defenses with medicine and other treatments.
Various causes of disease, including travel, microscopic organisms, poverty, and improperly prepared food
For thousands of years, people knew virtually nothing about the dangers of microscopic or other small harmful organisms.
However, when 19th-century scientists confirmed the link between germs and disease, we became better equipped to defend ourselves.
Medical researchers have since eliminated or greatly reduced the threat of some infectious diseases, including smallpox and polio.
Recently, however, others, such as yellow fever and dengue, have made a comeback.
Why?
Consider these factors:
Every year, millions of people travel around the globe, often transporting disease-causing agents.
According to an article in the journal Clinical Infectious Diseases, "virtually all of the contagious virulent infections " can be spread by international travelers.
Some bacteria have developed resistance to antibiotics.
"The world is heading towards a post-antibiotic era, in which common infections . . . can once again kill, " states the World Health Organization.
Civil unrest and poverty often hinder government efforts to control the spread of disease.
Many people lack practical knowledge of how to prevent disease.
Despite these disturbing trends, there is much you can do to protect yourself and your family.
The following will show that, even if you live in a developing land, simple and effective strategies may be within your reach.
Attitude Makes a Difference!
Which of the following do you think has the biggest effect on your happiness?
your circumstances
your genes
your attitude
SOME would choose "circumstances, " perhaps saying, "I would be happy . . .
"if only I had more money "
"if only I had a great marriage "
"if only I had better health "
In reality, though, attitude often trumps circumstances and genes when it comes to happiness.
And that is good news.
Because unlike your circumstances or your genes over which you have little or no control you can control your attitude.
"GOOD MEDICINE "
A Bible proverb states: "A joyful heart is good medicine, but a crushed spirit saps one’s strength. "
(Proverbs 17:22) In other words, your attitude makes a difference!
It can affect whether you attain a goal or give up or whether a tragic event brings out the best in you or the worst.
Some people might be skeptical of that idea.
They might reason:
‘Why hide my hardships behind a mask of optimism?’
‘No amount of positive thinking will change my situation.’
‘I would rather be a realist than a dreamer.’
Those thoughts might seem valid.
Still, there are benefits to adopting a positive outlook.
To illustrate, consider the following scenarios.
At their place of employment, Alex and Brian each work hard on separate projects.
After analyzing their work, the supervisor points out key errors in each project.
Alex
Alex: "I put so much time and effort into this project, and I still didn’t get it right!
I’ll never succeed at this job.
No matter how hard I work, it’s never good enough.
Why do I even try? "
Brian
Brian: "My boss highlighted aspects of my work that he liked, but I made a few fundamental mistakes.
I’ve learned some valuable lessons that will help me do better next time. "
WHAT DO YOU THINK?
Six months from now, which one will be a more capable employee Alex or Brian?
If you were an employer, which of those two men would you be more likely to hire or keep on your payroll?
When you face disappointment, which of those two men do you react like?
Andrea and Brittney suffer from bouts of loneliness.
Each of them has a different way of coping with the situation.
Andrea
Andrea focuses most of her attention on herself.
She refuses to do things for others unless they do things for her first.
She reasons, ‘Why should I waste my time on people who give me nothing in return?’
Brittney
Brittney makes a concerted effort to be kind to people and to do things for others, whether they seem appreciative or not.
She lives by the Golden Rule to treat others as she would like to be treated.
(Luke 6:31) For Brittney, doing good is its own reward.
Which of these two women would you rather have as a friend?
Which one is more likely to feel satisfied with her relationships?
If you suffer from bouts of loneliness, is your approach more like Andrea’s or more like Brittney’s?
You probably know people who fit the profile of Brian and Brittney.
You might even feel that you are like them.
If so, undoubtedly you can see that your attitude can make a difference in your life.
On the other hand, what if you are more like Alex or Andrea?
Consider three ways the Bible can help you to adopt a more positive view of life’s struggles.
1 AVOID PESSIMISM
THE BIBLE SAYS: "If you become discouraged in the day of distress, your strength will be meager. "
Proverbs 24:10.
WHAT IT MEANS: Pessimism will sap you of the strength you need to improve your situation or to help you deal with it.
Juliza
EXAMPLE: Juliza’s childhood was anything but happy.
Her father was an alcoholic, and her family was poor.
They moved from place to place.
At first, Juliza was pessimistic about her lot in life.
But that changed.
What helped?
"Even before my parents overcame their difficulties, " Juliza says, "the Bible helped me to improve my outlook.
And to this day, thoughts from the Bible keep my thinking from spiraling downward.
Now, when people display traits I don’t like, I try to understand why they behave the way they do. "
As Juliza learned, the Bible is a book of sound principles.
Its advice can help you to cope with negative circumstances.
For example, Ephesians 4:23 says: "Continue to be made new in your dominant mental attitude. "
As that verse implies, your outlook is not set in stone.
You can "be made new " in your thinking.
However, making such a change is an ongoing process.
That is why the verse says that we should "continue to be made new. "
2 FOCUS ON THE POSITIVE
THE BIBLE SAYS: "All the days of the afflicted one are bad, but the one with a cheerful heart has a continual feast. "
Proverbs 15:15.
WHAT IT MEANS: If you see everything negatively, you will feel "afflicted " and every day will appear "bad, " or gloomy.
But if you focus on positive things, you will have "a cheerful heart " and even feel joyful.
The choice is yours.
Yanko
EXAMPLE: After several surgeries to remove a brain tumor, Yanko had physical limitations that affected his movement and speech.
Feeling that these would stop him from reaching his goals, Yanko was deeply discouraged for years.
Then he changed.
How?
"Instead of focusing on my limitations, " he says, "I learned to occupy my mind with encouraging subjects. "
One way Yanko does this is by reading passages from the Bible.
"This keeps my thoughts positive, " he says.
"I haven’t totally put aside my long-term goals, but I’m focusing on the smaller goals that I can reach now.
When discouraging thoughts creep into my mind, I reflect on the many reasons I have to be happy. "
Like Yanko, you can confront your pessimistic thoughts and replace them with something positive.
If you are dealing with negative circumstances perhaps a health problem, as was the case with Yanko ask yourself: ‘Is the situation really hopeless?
Have I reached a dead end, or is this merely a roadblock?’
Learn to keep negative thoughts out by concentrating on something constructive.
3 DO THINGS FOR OTHERS
THE BIBLE SAYS: "There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving. "
Acts 20:35.
WHAT IT MEANS: Unselfish giving brings deep satisfaction to the giver.
Because we were created to do more than simply look after our own needs.
(Philippians 2:3, 4; 1 John 4:11) Experiencing the joy of giving can do much to help us cope with negative circumstances in life.
Josué
EXAMPLE: Josué suffers from spina bifida, a severe defect in his spinal column.
He is often racked with pain.
But Josué enjoys a productive life helping others.
"Rather than say, ‘I can’t do that,’ " says Josué, "I enjoy thinking of practical ways to help people with their daily needs.
I find ways to do things for others, and this fills my life with happiness. "
Josué washes dishes while he enjoys the company of a young family
Look for opportunities to be self-sacrificing.
For example, can you prepare a meal for a sick neighbor?
Do you know elderly ones who need help with tasks around the home?
Care for your attitude in the same way you would cultivate a garden.
Root out the poisonous weeds of pessimism and negativity.
Sow seeds of realistic optimism, and fertilize your life with actions that produce positive emotions.
You will reap an emotional crop that will make your life much more rewarding.
And it will confirm the fact that attitude makes a difference!
For the sake of their health, some people learn to say no to certain foods; you can do the same with negative attitudes
Emotional Health
The Bible warns against emotions that are harmful and encourages us to cultivate those that are beneficial.
ANGER
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "The one slow to anger is better than a mighty man. "​ Proverbs 16:32.
WHAT IT MEANS: We benefit when we develop the strength to control our emotions.
Although some anger may be justified at times, uncontrolled anger is destructive.
Modern researchers point out that in the heat of the moment, angry people often say or do things that they will later regret.
WHAT YOU CAN DO: Learn to control your anger before it controls you.
While some people think that uncontrolled anger is a sign of strength, we are wise to recognize that it is really a sign of weakness.
"As a city broken through, without a wall, is the man who cannot control his temper, " says the Bible.
(Proverbs 25:28) A practical way to control your anger is to get the facts before reacting.
"The insight of a man certainly slows down his anger. "
(Proverbs 19:11) We do well to listen carefully to both sides of a matter, which may provide insight that can steady our emotions.
GRATITUDE
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "Show yourselves thankful. "​ Colossians 3:15.
WHAT IT MEANS: It has been said that only a grateful person can be happy.
Even those who have gone through tremendous loss can attest to this.
They point out that the key to their emotional survival has been to focus on​ not what they lost ​but what they have to be grateful for.
WHAT YOU CAN DO: Each day, make a list of the things that you are grateful for.
These do not have to be major things.
Reflect on even the small things, such as a beautiful sunrise, a pleasant conversation with a loved one, or simply having another day of life.
These positive things can do much to boost your emotional health​ if you take the time to notice and appreciate them.
It can be especially beneficial to think about why you are grateful for your family and friends.
When you have identified what you appreciate about other people, tell them about it, either in person or in a letter, an e-mail, or a text message.
This will likely strengthen your relationships and enable you to experience the happiness that comes from giving.​ Acts 20:35.
OTHER BIBLE PRINCIPLES
A mother listens to an audio recording of the Bible while she folds her little girl’s clothes
You can download audio recordings of the Bible.
They are available in some 40 languages on jw.org
WALK AWAY FROM ARGUMENTS.
"Beginning a fight is like opening a floodgate; before the quarrel breaks out, take your leave. "​ PROVERBS 17:14.
AVOID UNNECESSARY WORRY ABOUT THE FUTURE.
"Never be anxious about the next day, for the next day will have its own anxieties.
Each day has enough of its own troubles. "​ MATTHEW 6:34.
THINK THINGS THROUGH INSTEAD OF REACTING MERELY ON THE BASIS OF EMOTION.
"Thinking ability will keep watch over you, and discernment will safeguard you. "​ PROVERBS 2:11.
Physical Health and Resilience
CHRONIC ILL HEALTH OR DISABILITY CAN HAVE A MAJOR IMPACT ON A PERSON’S LIFE.
After becoming physically paralyzed, a once active and healthy man named Ulf said: "I became deeply depressed.
My strength, courage, and power drained away . . . I felt ‘destroyed.’ "
Ulf’s experience reminds us that none of us have complete control over our health.
Still, we can take reasonable measures to reduce the risk of ill health.
But what if our health deteriorates?
Does that doom us to unhappiness?
Not at all, as we shall see.
First, though, let us consider some principles that promote good health.
BE "MODERATE IN HABITS. " (1 Timothy 3:2, 11) Habitually eating or drinking to excess is obviously bad for our health​ not to mention our finances!
"Do not be among those who drink too much wine, among those who gorge themselves on meat, for a drunkard and a glutton will come to poverty. "​ Proverbs 23:20, 21.
DO NOT POLLUTE YOUR BODY.
"Let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit. " (2 Corinthians 7:1) People defile their bodies when they chew or smoke tobacco or abuse alcohol or drugs.
Smoking, for example, "leads to disease and disability and harms nearly every organ of the body, " says the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
VIEW YOUR BODY AND YOUR LIFE AS PRECIOUS GIFTS.
"By [God] we have life and move and exist. "
(Acts 17:28) Appreciating that fact moves us to avoid taking needless risks, whether we are at work, driving, or choosing our recreation.
A momentary thrill is not worth a life of disability!
CONTROL NEGATIVE EMOTIONS. Your mind and body are closely linked.
So try to avoid undue anxiety, unbridled anger, envy, and other harmful emotions.
"Let go of anger and abandon rage, " says Psalm 37:8.
We also read: "Never be anxious about the next day, for the next day will have its own anxieties. "​ Matthew 6:34.
TRY TO FOCUS ON POSITIVE THOUGHTS.
"A calm heart gives life to the body, " says Proverbs 14:30.
The Bible also states: "A joyful heart is good medicine. "
(Proverbs 17:22) That is a scientifically sound statement.
"If you are happy, " said a doctor in Scotland, "you are likely in the future to have less in the way of physical illness than those who are unhappy. "
BUILD RESILIENCE.
Like Ulf, mentioned earlier, we may have no choice but to endure a persistent trial.
Still, we can choose how we endure.
Some become overwhelmed with discouragement, which may only make matters worse.
"If you become discouraged in the day of distress, your strength will be meager, " says Proverbs 24:10.
Others, perhaps after initial feelings of despair, bounce back.
They adapt.
They find ways to cope.
That was the case with Ulf.
He said that after much prayer and meditation on the Bible’s positive message, he "started to see opportunities instead of obstacles. "
Moreover, like many who undergo major trials, he learned valuable lessons in compassion and empathy, which moved him to share the Bible’s comforting message with others.
Another person who suffered greatly was a man named Steve.
At age 15, he had an accident that paralyzed him from the neck down.
By the time he was 18, he had regained the use of his arms.
He then went to a university, where his life spiraled into drugs, alcohol, and sexual immorality.
He had no hope​ until he began to study the Bible, which gave him a new outlook on life and helped him to conquer his bad habits.
"The emptiness that I had felt for so long was no longer there, " he said.
"My life is now filled with peace, happiness, and contentment. "
Steve and Ulf’s comments call to mind the words at Psalm 19:7, 8: "The law of Jehovah is perfect, restoring strength. . . .
The orders from Jehovah are righteous, causing the heart to rejoice; the commandment of Jehovah is clean, making the eyes shine. "
KEY POINTS
When applied, God’s laws and principles ‘restore strength, cause the heart to rejoice, and make the eyes shine.’​ Psalm 19:7, 8.
The Bible encourages us to . . .
Be moderate in habits
Take good care of our body
View life as sacred
Control negative emotions
Focus on positive thoughts
Build resilience
Physical Health
The Bible is not a medical textbook.
Yet, it promotes a healthful course of life.
Consider some Bible principles that can improve your life physically.
TAKE CARE OF YOUR BODY
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "No man ever hated his own body, but he feeds and cherishes it. "​ Ephesians 5:29.
WHAT IT MEANS: This Bible principle encourages us to do what we can to care for our physical health.
One study shows that many health problems are related to personal lifestyle choices.
Hence, making the right personal choices can lead to better health.
WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Nutrition.
Take charge of your nutrition by eating healthful foods and drinking enough water.
Stay Active.
Physical activity can improve your health regardless of your age, even if you are disabled or limited by chronic illness.
While loved ones and health practitioners can assist you with your exercise program, only you can make it work!
Get Enough Sleep.
Prolonged sleep deprivation is associated with risks for serious illnesses.
As a result of the choices they make, many people do not get enough sleep.
Yet, by choosing to sleep enough, you choose to live better.
AVOID HARMFUL HABITS
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "Let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit. "​ 2 Corinthians 7:1.
WHAT IT MEANS: We benefit from not polluting our bodies with harmful substances such as tobacco products, which are known to be a major cause of disease and death.
WHAT YOU CAN DO: Set a date to quit, and mark it on your calendar.
Just before that day, dispose of cigarettes, ashtrays, lighters, and other paraphernalia associated with this harmful habit.
Avoid places where others engage in habits like this.
Tell supporting friends about your decision.
A man reads the Bible
You may obtain a printed copy of the Bible by contacting one of Jehovah’s Witnesses in your community
BE SAFETY CONSCIOUS.
"If you build a new house, you must also make a parapet for your roof, so that you may not bring bloodguilt on your house because of someone falling from it. "​ DEUTERONOMY 22:8.
CONTROL YOUR ANGER.
"The one who is slow to anger has great discernment, but the impatient one displays his foolishness. "​ PROVERBS 14:29.
AVOID OVEREATING.
"Do not be . . . among those who gorge themselves. "​ PROVERBS 23:20.
How to Age Gracefully
HOW do you feel when the thought of aging comes up?
It fills many with concern, anxiety, and even dread.
This is because aging is usually associated with negatives, such as diminished looks, a frail body, memory loss, and chronic diseases.
However, the fact is that people differ greatly in the way they age.
Some enjoy relatively good health, physically and mentally, in their later years.
Advances in medicine have enabled others to treat or control chronic illnesses.
As a result, in some lands more and more people are living longer and healthier lives.
Nevertheless, whether confronted with age-related problems or not, most people wish to be able to age gracefully.
How can this be done?
In part, doing so depends on our attitude and our willingness and ability to adapt to this new phase in life.
To help in these areas, let us consider some simple and practical Bible principles.
BE MODEST: "Wisdom is with the modest ones. "
(Proverbs 11:2) In this context, "the modest ones " can refer to elderly ones who recognize and come to terms with the limitations of their age, not trying to deny or ignore them.
Charles, 93, in Brazil, is realistic when he says: "If you live long, you will have to age.
There is no way to turn back the clock. "
Being modest, however, in no way means adopting the defeatist attitude "I am old, and there is nothing more for me. "
Such an attitude can sap one of enthusiasm.
Instead, a modest person shows wisdom, making the best of a situation.
Corrado, 77, in Italy, wisely says: "When you drive uphill, you just change gears and avoid stalling the engine. "
Yes, adjustments need to be made when someone grows older.
Corrado and his wife have developed a balanced approach to domestic chores, following a moderately relaxed schedule to avoid feeling completely drained of energy at the end of the day.
Marian, 81, in Brazil, also has a down-to-earth approach to aging.
"I have learned to pace myself, " she says.
"I take short breaks between tasks when necessary.
I sit down or lie down to read or listen to music.
I have learned to recognize and respect my limits. "
An older man putting on a tie
Be balanced
BE BALANCED: "Women should adorn themselves in appropriate dress, with modesty and soundness of mind. " (1 Timothy 2:9) The expression "appropriate dress " denotes balance and good taste.
Barbara, 74, in Canada, says: "I try to look neat and clean.
I don’t want to look dowdy with that ‘I’m old; I don’t care what I look like’ attitude. "
Fern, 91, in Brazil, says: "I buy some new clothes once in a while to boost my spirits. "
And what can be said about older men?
"I try my best to look smart, wearing clean and fresh clothes, " says Antônio, 73, in Brazil.
Regarding personal hygiene, he adds: "I shower and shave daily. "
On the other hand, it is important to avoid becoming concerned about your personal appearance to the point of failing to exercise "soundness of mind. "
Bok-im, 69, in South Korea, has a balanced view about clothes.
She says: "I am quite aware that it is not appropriate for me to wear some of the clothes that I wore when I was young. "
An older man enjoys playing the piano for his wife
Be positive
BE POSITIVE: "All the days of the afflicted one are bad, but the one with a cheerful heart has a continual feast. "
(Proverbs 15:15) As you age, you may experience negative feelings when you remember your youthful vigor and the many things you were once able to do.
This is understandable.
However, make an effort not to be overcome by those negative feelings.
Dwelling on the past can make your days gloomy and discourage you from doing what you are still able to do.
Joseph, 79, in Canada, thinks positively: "I try to enjoy doing the things I can do and not cry over the things that I used to do but can’t do now. "
Reading and learning can also make you feel more positive, broadening your horizons.
Thus, to the extent possible, be alert for opportunities to read and learn new things.
Ernesto, 74, in the Philippines, goes to the library and checks out interesting books to read.
He says, "I still enjoy the thrill of adventure, the joy of traveling beyond the confines of home through the written word. "
Lennart, 75, in Sweden, even took on the daunting task of learning a new language.
An older woman giving a gift to a friend
Be generous
BE GENEROUS: "Practice giving, and people will give to you. "
(Luke 6:38) Make it a practice to share some of your time and resources with others.
This will give you a feeling of accomplishment and happiness.
Hosa, 85, in Brazil, makes it a point to help others despite her physical limitations.
She says: "I call friends who are sick or discouraged and write letters to them.
Sometimes I send them little gifts.
I also like to cook a meal or make a dessert for sick ones. "
Generosity begets generosity.
"When you show love to others, they respond by giving you their love and affection, " says Jan, 66, in Sweden.
Yes, a generous person creates an atmosphere of warmth and appreciation that others find enjoyable.
BE FRIENDLY: "Whoever isolates himself pursues his own selfish desires; he rejects all practical wisdom. "
(Proverbs 18:1) While there are times when you may want to be alone, avoid becoming isolated and withdrawn.
Innocent, 72, in Nigeria, enjoys the company of friends.
"I joyfully associate with people of all ages. "
Börje, 85, in Sweden, says: "I strive to be around young people.
Their vitality makes me feel young again at least on the inside. "
Take the initiative to invite friends over occasionally.
Han-sik, 72, in South Korea, says: "My wife and I like to invite friends of all ages elderly ones and teenagers for a get-together or dinner. "
People of various ages enjoying refreshments and association
Be friendly
Friendly people are communicative.
But since communication is a two-way street, you need to make it a point to be good company.
Show personal interest in others.
Helena, 71, in Mozambique, says: "I am friendly and treat others with dignity.
I listen to what they have to say in order to find out what they think and what they like. "
José, 73, in Brazil, says: "People enjoy being around good listeners those who show empathy and interest in others, who give a word of commendation at the right time, and who have a sense of humor. "
When expressing your thoughts, take care to ‘season your words with salt.’
(Colossians 4:6) Be thoughtful and encouraging.
BE THANKFUL: "Show yourselves thankful. "
(Colossians 3:15) When receiving help, show appreciation for the attention.
Expressions of thankfulness help to cultivate good relationships.
"My husband and I recently moved from a house to an apartment.
We had dozens of friends helping us.
We could not thank them enough.
We sent personalized thank-you cards and have had some of them over for a meal since then, " says Marie-Paule, 74, in Canada.
Jae-won, 76, in South Korea, appreciates the rides she gets to the Kingdom Hall.
She says: "I am so grateful for all this help that I make a point of offering some money for the gas.
I sometimes prepare small gifts with thank-you notes. "
Above all, be thankful for life itself.
"A live dog is better off than a dead lion, " wise King Solomon reminded us.
(Ecclesiastes 9:4) Yes, with the right attitude coupled with willingness to adapt, it is possible to age gracefully.
An older woman writing a letter
Be thankful
Fresh Air and Sunshine Natural "Antibiotics "?
WHEN scientists first discovered chemical antibiotics in the mid-20th century, doctors hoped that these new medications would eliminate certain diseases.
At first, the new medicines seemed to live up to their promise.
Yet, their widespread use since then has resulted in the development of antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
To find new weapons against infection, some scientists are taking a second look at disease-control methods of the past.
One of these involves harnessing the health benefits of sunshine and fresh air.
A Lesson From the Past
England had several early advocates of the curative value of sun and fresh air.
Physician John Lettsom (1744-1815) prescribed sea air and sunshine for children who were suffering from tuberculosis (TB).
In 1840, surgeon George Bodington noted that those who worked in the open air farmers, plowmen, shepherds were generally free of TB, while those who spent much of their time indoors seemed more susceptible to it.
Florence Nightingale (1820-1910) became famous for her innovations in nursing while caring for British soldiers injured during the Crimean War.
She asked: "Do you ever go into the bed-rooms of any persons . . . at night, or before the windows are opened in the morning, and ever find the air anything but unwholesomely close and foul? "
She recommended that the air in a patient’s room be kept as fresh as the outside air, but without chilling the patient.
She added: "It is the unqualified result of all my experience with the sick, that second only to their need of fresh air is their need of light . . .
And that it is not only light but direct sun-light they want. "
Many at that time also believed that exposing bed linens and clothing to the sun promoted health.
Science has progressed since the 1800’s, yet modern studies have reached similar conclusions.
For instance, a 2011 study in China found that crowded college dormitories with a low rate of ventilation are "associated with more respiratory infections. "
The World Health Organization (WHO) recognizes that natural ventilation, which includes outside air flowing through a building, is important for infection control.
Indeed, WHO guidelines published in 2009 encourage use of such natural ventilation as an effective measure in reducing the risk of infection at health-care facilities.
‘That is all very good,’ you might say.
‘But what is the science behind this?
How do sunshine and air prevent infection?’
Nature’s Disinfectants
Studies conducted at a United Kingdom Ministry of Defence site provide some answers.
Scientists there were trying to establish how long the air would remain dangerous if a biological weapon armed with harmful bacteria were exploded over London.
To determine the viability of airborne pathogens, the researchers anchored E. coli microorganisms to threads of spider silk and exposed them to the open air.
The experiment was performed at night, since it was known that sunlight kills these bacteria.
What were the results?
Some two hours later, nearly all the bacteria were dead.
Yet, when the bacteria were kept in a closed box in the same location and at the same temperature and humidity, most of them were still alive past the two-hour mark.
Evidently, something about being in the open air kills germs.
This so-called open-air factor has not been clearly identified.
However, researchers point to a compound that occurs naturally in open air and that "acts as a natural disinfectant against pathogens or germs that lurk in the atmosphere. "
Sunlight also has natural disinfecting properties.
The Journal of Hospital Infection explains that "the majority of microbes that cause airborne infections cannot tolerate sunlight. "
How can you take advantage of this?
You might want to go outdoors, where you can spend a moderate amount of time in the sunshine and breathe some fresh air.
It will likely do you good.
Living With Chronic Illness Can the Bible Help?
God cares about his servants who are sick.
Regarding a faithful servant, the Bible says: "Jehovah himself will sustain him upon a divan of illness. "
(Psalm 41:3) If you are living with chronic illness, the following three steps can help you to cope:
Pray for strength to endure.
You can receive "the peace of God that excels all thought, " which can reduce your anxiety and sustain you.​ Philippians 4:6, 7.
Be positive.
The Bible says: "Being cheerful keeps you healthy.
It is slow death to be gloomy all the time. "
(Proverbs 17:22, Good News Translation) Cultivate your sense of humor, since this not only can lighten dark times but also can benefit your health.
Build your hope in the future.
A sound hope can help you have joy despite chronic ailments.
(Romans 12:12) The Bible foretells a time when "no resident will say: ‘I am sick.’ " (Isaiah 33:24) God will then cure chronic illnesses that are beyond the power of modern science to solve.
For example, the Bible describes the reversal of the aging process this way: "Let his flesh become fresher than in youth; let him return to the days of his youthful vigor. "​ Job 33:25.
Note: While acknowledging the help that God provides, Jehovah’s Witnesses also seek medical treatment for chronic illness.
(Mark 2:17) We do not, however, endorse any specific medical approach; we feel that each person should make his own health decisions.
When You Have a Serious Illness
"When I learned that I had cancer in my lung and colon, I thought that I had just received a death sentence.
But after I got home from the doctor, I thought, ‘OK, it’s not what I expected, but I have to find a way to deal with this.’ "​ Linda, aged 71.
"I suffer from a debilitating nerve syndrome on the left side of my face.
On occasion, the severe pain has caused me to fall into depression.
Many times, I felt alone and even contemplated suicide. "​ Elise, aged 49.
A sick man in a wheelchair is surrounded by loved ones
IF YOU or a loved one has been diagnosed with a potentially life-threatening illness, you know how distressing it can be.
In addition to the disease itself, you have to deal with fragile emotions.
Fear and anxiety can be intensified by nerve-racking medical appointments, difficulty obtaining or paying for treatment, or the unpleasant side effects of medications.
The mental anguish associated with serious illness can be overwhelming.
Where can we turn for assistance?
Many have found that their greatest comfort comes from leaning on God in prayer and reading comforting passages found in the Bible.
Another help may come through the love and support that family and friends can provide.
HOW SOME HAVE COPED
"Face illness with your faith in God, " advised 58-year-old Robert, "and he will carry you through.
Go to Jehovah in prayer.
Let him know how you feel.
Ask him for holy spirit.
Ask him for strength to be strong for the family and to allow you to go through your illness with dignity.
"It means so much when your family supports you emotionally, when they are there for you.
I get phone calls every day from one or two who ask, ‘How are you doing?’
I get encouragement from friends all over.
They definitely give me a boost, and that helps me to keep going. "
If you are a friend visiting a sick person, note what Linda points out: "The patient no doubt wants to lead as normal a life as possible and may not always want to talk about the sickness.
So talk about the things you usually talk about. "
With strength from God and comfort from the Scriptures, as well as the support of loving family and friends, we can maintain our assurance that life is worth living, even when we are enduring a serious illness.
Lean on God.
"I inquired of Jehovah, and he answered me.
He rescued me from all my fears.
This lowly one called, and Jehovah heard. "​ Psalm 34:4, 6.
Linda, quoted earlier, says: "I never pray, ‘Make me better.’
I always pray, ‘Help me be strong, and help me to endure my illness.’ "
Draw strength from God’s Word.
"No resident will say: ‘I am sick.’ "​ Isaiah 33:24.
Tap into the sustaining power of hope by meditating on God’s promises for the future.
Seek support from family and friends.
"A true friend shows love at all times and is a brother who is born for times of distress. "​ Proverbs 17:17.
"Do not isolate yourself, " advises Elise, quoted earlier.
"Allow your friends to help you.
There might be times when you feel alone and you don’t even think that God is listening, but do not isolate yourself. "
How Can I Cope if I’m Not Well? Play
Current time 0:00
Duration 0:00 Mute
"THE glory of the young is their strength, " says Proverbs 20:29.
(The Jerusalem Bible) If you’re sick or disabled, you might feel as if that scripture could never apply to you.
But it can!
The fact is, many youths with disabilities and chronic illnesses have overcome the most daunting of obstacles.
Awake! interviewed four such youths.
Hiroki, in Japan, has suffered with cerebral palsy from birth.
"My neck muscles aren’t able to hold my head up straight, and my hands do just the opposite of what I want them to, " he says.
"I’m completely dependent on others for help. "
Natalie and her brother, James, in South Africa, were born with a rare form of dwarfism.
Natalie also has scoliosis, a deformity of the spine.
"I have undergone four spinal surgeries, " she says, "and because of the curvature of my spine, I have weak lungs. "
Timothy, in Britain, was diagnosed at the age of 17 with chronic fatigue syndrome.
"In less than two months, " he says, "I went from being healthy and active to being so weak that my legs would not support me. "
Danielle, in Australia, was diagnosed with diabetes at 19 years of age.
"Since diabetes isn’t visible, " she says, "some people don’t realize how serious it is.
The fact is, diabetes could kill me. "
If you suffer from some form of illness or disability, no doubt you’ll find the comments of Hiroki, Natalie, Timothy, and Danielle to be encouraging.
If you enjoy good health, their comments may help you to be more understanding of those who struggle with disability or illness.
Awake!: What is most challenging about your condition? Natalie, 20 South Africa
Natalie: For me, it’s dealing with how people react when they see me.
I never feel at ease.
I feel as if I’m constantly being looked at.
Danielle: With diabetes, the main challenge is knowing what to eat, how much to eat, and which foods I need to limit.
An imbalance in my diet could lead to hypoglycemia, which could put me in a coma.
Hiroki: I have a special wheelchair that’s adapted to my physique, and I spend about 15 hours a day in one position.
Also, I don’t sleep well.
The slightest noise wakes me up.
Timothy: At first, my biggest challenge was just accepting the fact that I was sick.
I was embarrassed by my condition.
Awake!: What other difficulties do you face?
Danielle, 24 Australia Danielle: Diabetes causes me to be very tired.
I need more sleep than others my age do.
Also, diabetes is a chronic illness for which there is no cure.
Natalie: Obviously, the height issue comes into play for me.
Doing ordinary things​ like reaching for items on the shelf at a store ​is a challenge.
When I shop alone, it takes a lot of effort.
Timothy: I’ve had to cope with continuous pain, along with bouts of depression.
Before I got sick, I was very active.
I had a job and a driver’s license.
I’d play sports, such as football and squash.
Now I’m confined to a wheelchair.
Hiroki: I have a speech disability.
This discourages me and holds me back from starting conversations.
Sometimes, involuntary hand movements cause me to hit someone accidentally.
When this happens, I can’t even say "I’m sorry, " on account of my speech problem.
Awake!: What has helped you to cope with your situation?
Danielle: I try to focus on the good things in my life.
I have a wonderful family, I have loving friends in the congregation and, most of all, I have Jehovah God as my support.
I also try to keep up-to-date with information on diabetes management.
I take responsibility for my health and do my best to look after myself.
Natalie: Prayer is a source of strength.
I try to deal with my problems one at a time.
Keeping busy helps me not to dwell on negative thoughts.
And I have two wonderful parents in whom I can confide. Timothy, 20 Britain
Timothy: I do something spiritual each day, even if it’s just for a short time.
For example, I start each day with a consideration of the daily text.
Personal Bible study and prayer are very important to me, especially when I’m at an emotional low.
Hiroki: I try not to worry about things that I can’t do anything about.
That’s a waste of time.
On the other hand, I do all I can to build myself up spiritually, and I don’t use my condition as an excuse not to study the Bible.
When I can’t sleep, I view it as an opportunity to pray.​ See Romans 12:12.
Awake!: How have others encouraged you?
Hiroki, 23 Japan
Hiroki: The elders always commend me for the little that I can do.
The brothers and sisters in the congregation also take me with them on their return visits and Bible studies.​ See Romans 12:10.
Danielle: Probably the thing that touches me most is when the brothers and sisters in the congregation sincerely commend me.
That makes me feel appreciated, and it encourages me to continue.
Timothy: There’s an elderly sister who always makes a special effort to talk to me at the meetings.
Elders and their wives have also given me encouragement and practical advice.
One elder, who is 84 years old, has helped me to set reachable goals.
A ministerial servant invited me to work with him in the ministry, and he arranged for us to work in an area that was flat and therefore accessible to my wheelchair.​ See Psalm 55:22.
Natalie: As soon as I walk into the Kingdom Hall, my spiritual brothers and sisters greet me with warm smiles.
The older ones always have an encouraging thought to share, despite their own hardships.​ See 2 Corinthians 4:16, 17.
Awake!: What helps you to keep a positive attitude?
Hiroki: As one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, I associate with an organization of people who have a bright hope.
Realizing what I’m part of helps me to be positive.​ See 2 Chronicles 15:7.
Danielle: I think about the privilege I have of understanding God’s purpose.
There are people who are in good health, yet they aren’t as satisfied with their life as I am with mine.​ See Proverbs 15:15.
Natalie: I find it important to surround myself with people who are positive.
It’s also encouraging to read experiences of others who are serving Jehovah despite trials.
And when I go to the Kingdom Hall, I always know I’ll be strengthened and reminded of what a privilege it is to be one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.​ See Hebrews 10:24, 25.
Timothy: According to 1 Corinthians 10:13, Jehovah won’t let us go through more than we can bear.
I reason that if my Creator is confident that I can cope with this trial, who am I to argue?
TO THINK ABOUT
Hiroki and Timothy are both confined to wheelchairs.
If you are in a similar situation, how can their comments help you to maintain a positive attitude?
Danielle notes that "since diabetes isn’t visible, some people don’t realize how serious it is. "
Do you too suffer from an "invisible " illness?
If so, what lessons can you learn from Danielle’s expressions?
Natalie says that one of the biggest challenges she faces is dealing with how people react when they see her.
How would you put someone like Natalie at ease?
If you have an illness or a disability that makes you feel the way Natalie does, how can you imitate her positive attitude?
List below the names of people you know of who suffer from a disability or a chronic illness.
What can you do to be supportive of each one of them?
Comfort From the Bible
Jesus has genuine compassion for those who are ailing.​ Mark 1:41.
By "curing every sort of disease and every sort of infirmity, " Jesus demonstrated the healing that will take place under God’s Kingdom.​ Matthew 4:23.
In God’s new world, "no resident will say: ‘I am sick,’ " and pain will be no more.​ Isaiah 33:24; Revelation 21:1-4.
Even death will be "brought to nothing. "​ 1 Corinthians 15:25, 26.
"I Refuse to Dwell On My Illness "
"I needed help getting in and out of bed.
Walking was painful.
My throat closed up so that I couldn’t swallow my pain pills.
I developed sores that wouldn’t heal, some of which later became gangrenous.
I had stomach ulcers and severe heartburn.
I didn’t understand what was happening.
I was just ten years old. "​ Elisa.
Elisa sharing the Bible’s message
Despite her limitations, Elisa enjoys teaching others about the Bible
SCLERODERMA​ meaning "hard skin " ​is a word used to describe diseases that afflict an estimated 2.5 million people worldwide.
The type most often seen in children is localized scleroderma, which mainly involves a hardening of the skin tissues.
Elisa, however, was diagnosed at age ten with a form of systemic scleroderma​ a condition that can seriously affect not only the skin but also the function of internal organs, involving the kidneys, heart, lungs, and gastrointestinal tract.
Doctors thought that treatment would prolong Elisa’s life by only five years.
Now, some 14 years later, Elisa is very much alive.
Although she is not cured, she maintains a positive attitude about life.
Awake! spoke to Elisa about her illness and her strength to endure.
When did you first become aware that you were not well?
When I was nine years old, I got a cut on my elbow, and it was extremely painful.
The wound got bigger, and it wouldn’t heal.
A blood test revealed that I had systemic scleroderma.
Because my health was deteriorating rapidly, we needed to find a doctor who had experience treating scleroderma.
How did your search turn out?
We found a rheumatologist.
She told my parents that chemotherapy could slow down the scleroderma and extend my life by five years, with the possibility that my illness might go into remission.
The downside was that chemotherapy would compromise my immune system.
Even a cold could prove fatal.
Obviously, the worst did not happen.
No​ thankfully, I’m still alive!
When I was about 12, though, I started experiencing severe chest pains that would last for about 30 minutes, sometimes twice a day.
They were so bad that they made me scream.
What was the cause?
The doctors found that my hemoglobin level was dangerously low and that my heart was working overtime to pump blood to my brain.
Within a few weeks, treatment relieved the problem.
But at that point, I remember thinking that anything could happen from one day to the next.
I felt more helpless than ever, as if I had no control over what was happening to me.
It has been 14 years since your condition was diagnosed. What is the state of your health now?
I still live with pain, and I have a number of ailments that are associated with scleroderma.
These include ulcers, lung fibrosis, and severe heartburn.
Still, I refuse to dwell on my illness or waste time feeling sad.
I have other things to do.
Like what?
I love drawing, making clothes, making jewelry.
Most important, though, as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, I engage in the work of teaching the Bible.
Even when I am not able to walk to people’s homes, I am able to assist other Witnesses who conduct Bible study sessions with people in our area.
I have even had students of my own.
The ministry gives my life purpose.
Why do you engage in this work when you have your own problems to contend with?
I know that the information I share with people is vital and beneficial.
Besides, when I keep busy helping others in this way, I’m happier.
I even feel healthier!
For that brief period of time, I forget that I’m sick.
What role does the Bible play in your positive viewpoint?
It reminds me that my suffering​ and the suffering of others as well ​is just temporary.
Revelation 21:4 says that at his appointed time, God "will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. "
Thinking about scriptures like that helps strengthen my faith in God’s promise of a bright future​ not just for those who suffer with chronic illnesses but for everyone.
Jehovah ‘Daily Carries the Load for Me’
Maretha du Raan
Despite an uncertain health condition that might have seemed unbearable, I have felt the loving support of our dear heavenly Father throughout my life.
And for more than 20 years, I have found special joy serving Jehovah as a pioneer.
I was born in 1956 with spina bifida.
Because the neural tube in my spine failed to close completely, nerve damage has made it difficult for me to walk and has caused other serious health problems.
Some time before my birth, missionaries of Jehovah’s Witnesses started to study the Bible with my parents.
During my childhood, only a few isolated publishers lived in my hometown of Usakos, Namibia.
Hence, we considered the material for congregation meetings as a family.
At age seven, I had a urostomy, an operation performed to create an artificial opening in my body so that I could pass urine.
At age 14, I developed epilepsy.
Because the nearest high school was far away and I needed special care from my parents, I could not complete my schooling.
Nevertheless, I decided to fortify myself spiritually.
Many of our Christian publications were not yet available in Afrikaans, my mother tongue.
So I learned to read English in order to study a number of our books.
I became a Kingdom publisher and got baptized at age 19.
During the following four years, I had many health problems and emotional difficulties.
Moreover, in the close-knit community in my hometown, fear of man prevented me from having a zealous share in the ministry.
During my early 20’s, we moved from Namibia to South Africa, and for the first time, I was able to associate with a congregation.
How wonderful that was!
However, I had to undergo surgery again this time a colostomy.
Some time later, I heard a circuit overseer speak on the subject of pioneering.
His remarks touched my heart.
I knew that my health was less than ideal, but I had seen how Jehovah had carried me through many difficulties.
So I applied to be a regular pioneer.
However, because of my health problems, the elders hesitated to approve my application.
Still, I decided to give Kingdom preaching my best effort.
With the help of my mother and others, I managed to devote pioneer hours to the ministry over a period of six months.
That proved my determination to pioneer and showed that my health problems were manageable.
I applied again, and this time my application was approved.
On September 1, 1988, I became a regular pioneer.
As a pioneer, I have constantly experienced Jehovah’s support.
Teaching new ones the truth instead of focusing on my own situation has protected me, nurtured me, and helped me to grow spiritually.
I have derived immense joy from helping a number of individuals to dedication and baptism.
My health remains uncertain.
But Jehovah ‘daily carries the load for me.’
(Ps.
68:19) He does more than just make my life bearable; he makes it a pleasure for me to be alive!
Finding Strength Out of Weakness
As told by Maite Morlans
Seeing my fragile 65-pound (29 kg) body seated in a wheelchair, no one would think that I am strong.
But as my body loses its power, inner strength keeps me going.
Let me explain how strength and weakness have shaped my life.
Maite in France, at age four
At age four
Thinking of my childhood brings back memories of happy days in a country cottage in the south of France, where my parents lived.
My father made a swing for me, and I loved running around the garden.
In 1966, Jehovah’s Witnesses visited our home and had long conversations with my father.
Just seven months later, he resolved to become a Witness.
My mother soon followed in his footsteps, and they raised me in a warm family environment.
My problems began shortly after we returned to Spain, my parents’ home country.
I started feeling stabbing pains in my hands and ankles.
After two years of visiting many doctors, we found a renowned rheumatologist, who solemnly said, "It’s too late. "
My mother started to weep.
Strange expressions, such as "autoimmune chronic illness " and "juvenile polyarthritis, " echoed around that cold, gray room.
Though I understood little as a ten-year-old girl, I realized that the news was bad.
The doctor suggested treatment in a children’s sanatorium.
On my arrival, the austere building dismayed me.
Discipline was strict: The nuns cut my hair and dressed me in a dowdy uniform.
‘How can I endure life here?’ I thought, tearfully.
JEHOVAH BECOMES REAL TO ME
Because my parents had taught me to serve Jehovah, I refused to take part in Catholic rituals in the sanatorium.
The nuns found it hard to understand why I refused.
I implored Jehovah not to abandon me, and I soon felt his protective arm around me, like the warm, firm hug of a loving father.
My parents were allowed to visit me briefly on Saturdays.
They brought me Bible publications to read to keep my faith strong.
Children normally could not have their own books, but the nuns allowed me to keep them along with my Bible, which I read every day.
I also talked to other girls about my hope of living forever in the earthly Paradise, where nobody would get sick.
(Revelation 21:3, 4) Despite feeling sad and lonely at times, I was glad that my faith and trust in Jehovah were growing stronger.
After six long months, the doctors sent me home.
My illness had not relented, but I felt happy to be back with my parents.
My joints became more deformed, and I suffered more pain.
I entered my teenage years very weak.
Yet, at the age of 14, I got baptized, determined to serve my heavenly Father the best I could.
However, I sometimes felt disappointed in him. "Why me?
Please heal me, " I prayed.
"Don’t you see how much I am suffering? "
Adolescence was a tough time for me.
I had to accept that I would not get better.
I could not help comparing myself with my friends​ so healthy and full of life.
I felt inferior, and I became introverted.
Nevertheless, my family and friends supported me.
I fondly remember Alicia​ 20 years older than I am ​who became a true friend.
She helped me to look beyond my illness and to take an interest in others rather than brooding on my own problems.
FINDING WAYS TO MAKE MY LIFE MEANINGFUL
When I was 18, I suffered a severe relapse, and even attending Christian meetings left me exhausted.
Nevertheless, I took advantage of all my "spare time " at home to study the Bible carefully.
The book of Job and the Psalms helped me to understand that at present Jehovah God cares for us primarily spiritually rather than physically.
My frequent prayers brought me "the power beyond what is normal " and "the peace of God that surpasses all understanding. "​ 2 Corinthians 4:7; Philippians 4:6, 7.
At the age of 22, I had to face up to life in a wheelchair.
I feared that people would stop noticing me and see only a wheelchair with a sickly woman.
However, the wheelchair restored some of my independence, and the "curse " became a blessing.
A friend named Isabel suggested that I set a personal goal of spending 60 hours in the preaching work with her for one month.
At first, I thought the idea was ridiculous.
But I asked Jehovah for help, and with support from my family and friends, I did it.
That hectic month passed quickly, and I found that I had overcome my fears and embarrassment.
I enjoyed it so much that in 1996 I decided to become a regular pioneer​ spending a set number of hours each month in the ministry.
It was one of my best decisions, drawing me closer to God and even strengthening me physically.
Engaging in the ministry allowed me to share my faith with many people and help some to become God’s friends.
JEHOVAH KEEPS HOLD OF ME
In the summer of 2001, I suffered a bad car accident and broke both legs.
As I lay in a hospital bed in excruciating pain, I fervently offered a silent prayer: "Please, Jehovah, don’t leave me! "
Just then, a woman in a nearby bed asked me, "Are you one of Jehovah’s Witnesses? "
I had no strength to answer, so I just nodded.
"I know you people!
I usually read your magazines, " she said.
Those words comforted me greatly.
Even in my pitiful state, I could give a witness for Jehovah.
What an honor!
When I recovered a bit, I decided to witness some more.
My mother wheeled me around the hospital ward with my two legs in plaster.
Each day, we visited a few patients, asked how they were, and left some Bible literature with them.
Those visits were exhausting, but Jehovah gave me the needed strength.
Maite with her parents
With my parents in 2003
In the past few years, my aches and pains have increased and the loss of my father added to my distress.
Still, I try to keep a positive outlook.
How?
Whenever possible, I try to be with friends and relatives, and that helps take my mind off my problems.
And when I am alone, I read, study the Bible, or preach to others by phone.
Often I close my eyes and open my private "window " into the new world that God promises
I also try to enjoy simple pleasures, such as the breeze on my face or the fragrance of flowers.
These give me reasons to be thankful.
A good sense of humor also works wonders.
One day while out preaching, my friend, who was pushing my wheelchair, paused to make a note.
Suddenly I was rolling down a slope out of control, and I crashed into a parked car.
Both of us were shocked, but when we saw that nothing serious had happened, we had a good laugh.
Maite Morlans
There are many things in life I cannot do.
I call them my pending wishes.
Often I close my eyes and open my private "window " into the new world that God promises.
(2 Peter 3:13) I imagine myself healthy, walking about and enjoying life to the full.
I take to heart King David’s words: "Hope in Jehovah; be courageous and strong of heart. "
(Psalm 27:14) Although my body has become more and more fragile, Jehovah has made me strong.
I continue to find strength in my weakness.
Living Without Sight
"I lost most of my sight at birth when I was given harsh eye drops.
During my teenage years, I became totally blind and sank into a deep depression. "​ Paqui, a middle-aged woman whose husband is also blind.
BLINDNESS or serious visual impairment can have many causes, including injury and disease.
These may affect the eyes, the optic nerves, or the brain.
People who lose much or all of their sight often experience denial, grief, and fear.
Many, though, learn to cope very well and go on to lead satisfying lives.
The eyes are normally our primary source of information about the world around us.
So when someone loses his sight, he comes to rely more heavily on other senses​ hearing, smell, touch, and taste.
According to the magazine Scientific American, research on neuroplasticity suggests that the brain has the ability "to change with experience. "
The article adds: "A large body of evidence shows when the brain is deprived of input in one sensory modality, it is capable of reorganizing itself to support and augment other senses. "
Consider the following.
Hearing: From voices to footsteps, sounds can paint a mental picture.
"I have learned to remember and recognize people by their voices or even by how they walk, " says a blind man named Fernando.
Juan, who is also blind, says: "For a blind person, another’s voice is his identity. "
And like all of us, the blind take careful note of tone, which can convey a variety of emotions.
To the trained ear of a blind person, sound also says a lot about the environment​ from the direction of traffic to the size of a room to the location of certain obstacles.
Smell: The sense of smell can also be a rich source of information, but not just about the source of an aroma.
For example, when a blind person walks along a certain route, his sense of smell can help him to form a mental map that may include coffee shops, restaurants, markets, and so on.
Of course, familiar sounds add to the map, as do details acquired through the sense of touch.
Touch: "My fingers are my eyes, " says Francisco.
The range of those "eyes " can be extended by means of a cane.
Manasés, who was born blind and learned to use a cane in childhood, said, "I know exactly where I am thanks to my other senses, my memory, and the patterns on the sidewalk that I detect with the aid of my cane. "
A person reads a Braille Watchtower magazine
Reading a Braille Watchtower magazine
The sense of touch also enables many blind people to read by means of literature published in Braille.
Nowadays, in fact, it is not unusual for a blind person to have access to a number of provisions to enrich his mental and spiritual life.
Besides publications in Braille, these provisions include audio recordings and computer-based technology.
With the help of these, the blind can read the Bible and a variety of Bible study aids.
Those spiritual provisions have been a source of immeasurable comfort and hope to Paqui and her husband, mentioned at the outset.
They have also gained the support of a large spiritual family, the local Christian congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
"We are now able to live a full and reasonably independent life, " Paqui says.
Indeed, blindness presents special challenges.
But what a testimony to human adaptability and resilience when people confront those challenges and carry on with the joys of life!
Although Blind, I Have a Rewarding Life Marco Antonio and his guide dog, Dante
Marco Antonio is a husband, father, and joint owner of a business.
He is also blind from birth.
He spoke with Awake! about some of his joys and challenges.
You run a business.
How do you accomplish that?
In my work, I handle telephone inquiries, meet clients and suppliers, and do banking.
What do you do for recreation?
I love music.
It relaxes me.
And I play the piano, although it’s a challenge because I cannot read Braille music and at the same time play it with both hands.
When I first play a piece of music, I read it with my right hand and play the piano with the left.
Then I repeat the process, but with my hands swapping roles.
When I learn the score by heart, I play with both hands.
Have you faced any special challenges?
When I was growing up, my parents and siblings took good care of me, and they treated me as if I were not blind.
Granted, I suffered the usual bumps and falls, but I got used to doing most things a sighted person can do.
When I reached adulthood, the only thing that really bothered me was that I couldn’t drive.
Now I am a husband and father, and I have a loving family whom I support and who give me support.
My dear son, David, has inherited my condition​ optic nerve atrophy.
But I am trying to set a good example for him.
I want him to learn that with patience and determination, he can do many things.
You now have a guide dog.
Why did you choose to get one?
With Dante​ that’s my dog’s name ​I can walk faster and safer.
When I go somewhere for the first time, my wife, Loli, who is not blind, accompanies us so that Dante and I can learn the route.
I must confess that at first I found it hard to entrust my safety to a dog.
But Dante earned my full trust.
No matter what happens around us, he concentrates on the job.
But when I remove his harness, he behaves like any other dog.
As one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, how do you personally study the Bible?
When technology for the blind was limited, Loli read the Bible and Bible study aids to me.
She was a great help.
As a result, I was even able to give talks at congregation meetings.
Nowadays, though, I can read for myself because I have the Bible and study aids in Braille.
I can also go to the website established by Jehovah’s Witnesses​ jw.org​ where I download audio recordings.
And I have a Braille display, which enables me to read what is on my computer monitor.
The display has small pins that pop up in groups to form Braille characters.
It’s quite amazing!
A privilege I have especially enjoyed is assisting with Braille transcription at the Spain branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Madrid.
In order to improve the quality of Braille publications, those preparing them value suggestions from the blind.
So I can honestly say that I feel both loved and appreciated by my spiritual brothers and sisters.
Do you enjoy interacting with others?
Yes, especially with my immediate family and fellow Witnesses, with whom I also go out preaching from door to door.
My spiritual brothers and sisters treat me the way they treat anybody else.
In fact, they sometimes forget that I’m blind!
I might add that the ministry enables me to share with others the precious hope found in the Bible.
For example, at Isaiah 35:5, we read that under God’s Kingdom government, "the eyes of the blind will be opened. "
When Jesus Christ was on the earth, he cured the blind, giving us a preview of that future time.
(Matthew 15:30, 31) Blindness, therefore, is a temporary problem, which is true of all disabilities.
In the earthly Paradise to come, no one will say, ‘I am sick or disabled.’​ Isaiah 33:24; Luke 23:43.
Jairo’s Eyes His Way to Serve God
As told by his brother Samuel Ruiz-León Arroyo
Can you imagine having no control of your body except for your eyes?
My brother Jairo is in such a predicament.
Yet, he enjoys a meaningful life.
Before I explain why he has found his life to be worth living, let me tell you his story.
Jairo was born with a type of cerebral palsy called spastic quadriplegia.
As a result, he has no control over most of his body.
His brain cannot send clear signals to his muscles, so his limbs twist, or writhe, uncontrollably.
Sometimes, Jairo’s unpredictable jerking movements even cause him to hurt himself.
People nearby may also get hurt if they are not alert.
Sadly, his arms and legs must often be tied to his wheelchair to prevent such accidents.
PAINFUL PATH TO ADULTHOOD
Jairo’s physical growth has been very painful.
When he was three months old, he started to have seizures that left him unconscious.
All too often, Mum would hold him tightly and rush him to the hospital, convinced that he was dead.
Because of all the tightening and contracting, in time Jairo’s bones became deformed.
At the age of 16, he dislocated his pelvis and required major surgery to his thigh, hip, and pelvis.
I still remember Jairo crying out in pain every night during his recovery.
Jairo’s severe disability makes him totally reliant on others to carry out daily functions, such as eating, getting dressed, and getting to bed.
Mum and Dad usually perform these tasks.
Though Jairo needs constant help, our parents always remind him that his life depends not only on humans but also on God.
A WAY OF COMMUNICATION OPENS
Our parents are Jehovah’s Witnesses, and they have been reading Bible stories to Jairo ever since he was a baby.
They always knew that life is more meaningful when one has a relationship with God.
Jairo was trapped in a frail body that jerked continually, but he could have a bright, solid hope for the future.
However, they often wondered if Jairo could grasp Bible knowledge.
One day, when Jairo was a child, Dad asked him, "Jairo, can you please talk to me? "
Then he added, "If you really love me, you will! "
As Dad begged him to say at least one word, tears welled up in Jairo’s eyes.
Though he tried to express his feelings with words, he could only mutter guttural sounds.
Father felt bad for having made Jairo cry.
But that reaction showed that Jairo understood what Father had said.
The problem was that he could not speak.
Before long, our parents noticed that Jairo at times moved his eyes rapidly in an apparent attempt to convey his thoughts and feelings.
It was frustrating for Jairo that he could not always make himself understood.
But when my parents learned to decipher his eye signals and get him what he needed, Jairo’s face would beam with a broad grin.
It was his way of saying thank you.
A speech therapist suggested that for better communication, we should raise both hands in the air when asking him a yes-or-no question.
The right hand means yes, the left hand no.
Thus, he could express his wishes by fixing his eyes on the proper hand.
A MILESTONE IN JAIRO’S LIFE
Three times a year, Jehovah’s Witnesses hold assemblies and conventions, where Bible talks are presented to large audiences.
Jairo always got excited during the talk that was addressed to baptism candidates.
One day, when Jairo was 16, Father asked him, "Jairo, do you want to get baptized? "
At once, his decisive look at Dad’s right hand revealed his desire to take that step.
Then Dad added, "Have you promised God in prayer to serve him forever? "
Once again, Jairo gazed straight at Dad’s right hand.
It was clear that Jairo had already dedicated his life to Jehovah.
After several Bible discussions, it was also clear that Jairo understood the significance of Christian baptism.
So, in 2004, he answered the most important question he was ever asked, "Have you dedicated yourself to God to do his will? "
Jairo answered this question by raising his eyes upward.
It was his prearranged way of saying yes.
Thus, at age 17, he got baptized as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
EYES FOCUSED ON THE THINGS OF GOD
In 2011, a new way to communicate opened up for Jairo an eye-controlled computer.
This device tracks the movements of his iris so that he can activate icons on the screen.
Blinking or staring at an icon is like clicking a mouse on a computer.
A board consisting of pictograms was created to help Jairo communicate.
When he blinks at one of them, the built-in software converts a written message into an electronic voice.
Jairo using his eye-controlled computer
As Jairo’s understanding of the Bible increased, so did his desire to help others spiritually.
During our weekly family Bible study, he often looks back and forth between me and his computer.
This is his way of reminding me that I should write down comments that he can offer during question-and-answer sessions at meetings of our Christian congregation.
At the meeting, he patiently navigates through the screen to click on the appropriate icon, and then his electronic voice is heard by everyone.
He smiles broadly every time he encourages the members of the congregation in this way.
Alex, one of Jairo’s young friends, observes, "It always impresses me when I hear Jairo’s comments on a Bible subject. "
Jairo using his computer to make a comment at a meeting
Jairo uses his eye-controlled computer and its electronic voice to comment at meetings and to share his beliefs with others
Jairo also uses his eyes to tell others about his beliefs.
One way he does this is by clicking a pictogram that portrays a garden where animals and people of all races live in peaceful conditions.
When he activates this, his computer voice proclaims, "The hope of the Bible is that the earth will be a paradise where there will be no more sickness and death, Revelation 21:4. "
If the listener shows interest, another click causes his computer to say, "Would you like to study the Bible with me? "
Surprisingly, our grandfather accepted this invitation.
It is thrilling to see Jairo, assisted by a fellow Witness, slowly teaching Grandpa the Bible!
Happily, Grandpa got baptized at the regional convention in Madrid in August 2014.
Jairo sharing in the public ministry
Jairo’s devotion to God does not go unnoticed by the teachers at his school.
Rosario, one of his speech therapists, once confessed: "If I ever thought about joining a religion, I would become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
I have seen how Jairo’s faith has given him a real purpose in life, despite his difficult situation. "
Jairo’s eyes always light up when I read him the Bible’s promise: "The lame will leap like the deer, and the tongue of the speechless will shout for joy. "
(Isaiah 35:6) Although he does get discouraged at times, he is generally in good spirits.
This is possible only because his life revolves around God and around his Christian friends.
His cheerful outlook and strong faith are a testimony that serving Jehovah makes a challenging life worth living.
What Jairo’s Associates Say
Rosa, who is 63, observes: "Jairo radiates joy. And his intense longing to serve Jehovah is contagious. "
Antonio, who is 32, notes: "I am moved every time I see Jairo expressing his faith. "
Andrés, who is 67, says: "It seems that Jairo gets the sense of some Bible teachings better than I do. "
Serving God Is His Medicine!
When two pioneers were invited into a certain house in Kenya, they were surprised to see the slight figure of a man lying on a bed.
He had a very small torso and short arms.
As they shared with him God’s promise that "the lame one will climb up just as a stag does, " the man responded with a wide smile.
Isa.
35:6.
The pioneers learned that Onesmus, now in his late 30’s, was born with osteogenesis imperfecta, or brittle bone disease.
His bones were extremely fragile so much so that the slightest pressure caused them to break.
Since there is no cure or effective treatment for the disease, Onesmus expected to spend the rest of his life in pain and confined to a wheelchair.
Onesmus accepted a personal Bible study.
However, his mother objected to his attending Christian meetings, reasoning that this might cause him injury and additional pain.
So the brothers recorded the meetings, and Onesmus listened to them at home.
After studying for five months, Onesmus decided that he wanted to attend the meetings despite the risks.
Did attending Christian meetings add to Onesmus’ pain?
The effect was the opposite.
"My constant pain seemed to diminish during the meetings, " Onesmus recalls.
He thought that his newfound hope was the reason he felt better.
Onesmus’ mother observed the change in her son’s disposition and was so delighted that she too agreed to study the Bible.
"Serving God is my son’s medicine, " she would say.
Before long, Onesmus became an unbaptized publisher.
In time, he was baptized and now serves as a ministerial servant.
Although he is not able to use his legs and one of his arms, Onesmus had the desire to do all he could in Jehovah’s service.
He wanted to auxiliary pioneer but was reluctant to apply.
Why?
Because he knew that he would have to rely entirely on another person to push his wheelchair.
When he expressed his concern to his fellow Christians, they promised to support him.
This they did, helping Onesmus to auxiliary pioneer.
Onesmus’ desire to be a regular pioneer met with the same concern.
At one point, however, the daily text provided the encouragement he needed.
The text was Psalm 34:8: "Taste and see that Jehovah is good. "
After meditating on that scripture, Onesmus decided to become a regular pioneer.
He now preaches four days a week and has several Bible students who are making good spiritual progress.
In 2010, he attended the Pioneer Service School.
How delighted Onesmus was to have as his instructor one of the two brothers who initially called on him!
Onesmus’ parents have now passed away, but brothers and sisters in the congregation care for his daily needs.
He is grateful for all the blessings he now enjoys, and he looks forward to the day when "no resident will say: ‘I am sick.’
" Isa.
33:24.
Jehovah Has Given Me More Than I Deserve
As told by Félix Alarcón
Félix Alarcón
I was just 17 years old and had the concerns and ambitions typical of most teenagers.
I loved mingling with my friends, swimming, and playing soccer.
But one evening my life changed dramatically.
I was involved in a horrific motorcycle accident that left me paralyzed from the neck down.
That was some 30 years ago, and I have been bedridden for a long time now.
I grew up in the city of Alicante, on the east coast of Spain.
My family was completely dysfunctional, so as a youth I spent much of my time on the streets.
Close to my house was a tire repair shop.
There I became friends with José María, one of the employees.
He was a warm person who gave me the attention I sorely missed in my own family.
In times of distress, he was like a real brother to me​ a true friend, although he was 20 years my senior.
José María had started studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses.
I could tell that he loved the Scriptures, and he often shared Bible truths with me.
I listened to him respectfully, but I never really took an interest in what he said.
My teenage heart was preoccupied with other matters.
That, however, was about to change.
AN ACCIDENT THAT CHANGED MY LIFE
I do not like to talk much about that road accident.
What I will say is that I was foolish and reckless.
In just one day, my whole life changed completely.
From being a young teenager full of vitality, I suddenly found myself paralyzed and stuck inside a hospital ward.
Coming to terms with this predicament was really tough.
I kept asking myself, ‘Is there any point in living?’
José María came to see me, and he quickly arranged for Jehovah’s Witnesses from the local congregation to visit me at the hospital.
Those regular visits touched my heart.
As soon as I left the intensive care unit, I began to study the Bible.
I discovered the truth about why people suffer and die and why God allows bad things to happen.
I also learned about God’s promises for the future, when the whole earth will be filled with perfect humans and nobody will ever say: "I am sick. "
(Isaiah 33:24) For the first time in my life, a wonderful hope was opening up to me.
When I left the hospital, I progressed quickly in my study of the Bible.
With the use of a special wheelchair, I even attended some meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses and shared in their preaching activity.
On November 5, 1988, at the age of 20, I was baptized by immersion in a special bathtub.
Jehovah God had given me a whole new outlook on life.
But what could I do to show my appreciation?
ON THE MOVE DESPITE MY DISABILITY
I was determined not to let my condition stop me from doing all that I could in Jehovah’s service.
I wanted to progress.
(1 Timothy 4:15) At first, that was not easy, for my family was opposed to my new faith.
But I had my fellow believers, who were my spiritual brothers and sisters.
They made sure that I never missed a meeting and that I had an active share in the preaching work.
As time went by, however, it became evident that I was going to need round-the-clock specialized care.
After a long search, I eventually found a suitable center for the disabled in the city of Valencia, 100 miles (160 km) north of Alicante.
This center became my permanent home.
Although bedridden, I am determined to share my faith with others
Although bedridden, I was determined to continue pressing forward.
Using my disability pension and other subsidies, I obtained a computer and had it installed next to my bed.
I also purchased a cell phone.
Now, each morning, a caregiver switches on my computer and activates my cell phone.
To operate the computer, I use a joystick that I control with my chin.
I also have a special rod that I hold with my mouth. This rod allows me to type letters on a keyboard and dial numbers on my cell phone.
Félix Alarcón holds a rod in his mouth and dials numbers on a cell phone
With a rod I can dial numbers on a cell phone
How has this technology helped me?
First of all, it gives me access to the jw.org website and the Watchtower ONLINE LIBRARY.
What marvelous tools these have proved to be for me!
I often spend hours each day studying and researching Bible-based publications so that I can continue learning about God and his wonderful qualities.
And whenever I feel alone or a little discouraged, there is always something on the website that lifts my spirits.
My computer also allows me to listen to and participate in congregation meetings.
I can comment, offer prayers, present talks, and even read the Watchtower magazine when I am assigned to do so.
Although I cannot attend those meetings in person, I still feel that I am very much a part of the local congregation.
Having a telephone and a computer also allows me to have a full share in the preaching work.
True, I cannot go from house to house as most of Jehovah’s Witnesses do.
But that has not stopped me.
Using these tools I am able to share my faith with others.
In fact, I enjoy my phone conversations so much that the local elders have even asked me to coordinate telephone preaching campaigns.
These campaigns have been particularly helpful to housebound members of the congregation who are unable to leave their homes.
Using the jw.org website, Félix Alarcón conducts a Bible study with a man
Conducting a Bible study
But my life does not revolve around just technology.
Each day, dear friends come to see me.
They bring along relatives and acquaintances who are interested in the Bible.
Often, they even ask me to take the lead in discussions with them.
On other occasions, families visit and invite me to share in their evening of family worship.
I especially like it when young children sit at my bedside and tell me why they love Jehovah.
A family visits Félix Alarcón and the children show him pictures
Enjoying an evening of family worship with friends
I appreciate receiving so many visitors.
My room is often a hub of activity, with friends coming to see me from near and far.
As you can imagine, this loving attention surprises the caregivers at my center.
Each day, I thank Jehovah for allowing me to be part of such a wonderful brotherhood.
BATTLING ON
Whenever anybody greets me and asks how I am, I simply say, "Here I am, still battling on! "
Of course, I know I am not alone in this struggle.
Whatever our circumstances or impediments, all Christians are in a fight​ "the fine fight of the faith. " (1 Timothy 6:12) What has helped me to battle on for so many years?
I pray each day and thank Jehovah for giving my life a sense of purpose.
And I try to stay as busy as possible in serving God, keeping my eyes focused on the hope ahead.
José Maria, Félix Alarcón’s good friend
José María
I often think about the new world and what it will be like to run and jump again.
At times, I have joked with my good friend José María​ who suffers from polio ​about running a marathon together.
"Who would win? "
I ask him. "It doesn’t matter who wins, " he replies.
"What really matters is being there, in Paradise, to run the race. "
It has not been easy for me to come to terms with my disability.
I know that as a teenager, I did something stupid, and that has cost me dearly.
Yet, how grateful I am that Jehovah did not abandon me.
He has given me so much​ a large spiritual family, the will to live, the joy of helping others, and a wonderful hope for the future.
If I had to sum up my feelings in just one sentence, I guess I would say that Jehovah has truly given me more than I deserve.
I Found Hope When I Needed It Most
As told by Miklós Aleksza
Suddenly I found myself lying facedown in water.
I tried to lift my head to breathe, but my neck muscles did not respond.
Terrified, I tried to roll over, but my arms and legs refused to move.
My lungs began to take in water.
On that warm summer’s day in 1991, my life changed completely.
Miklós Aleksza
I WAS born in the city of Szerencs and grew up in the village of Tiszaladány in the northeast of Hungary.
In June 1991, some friends and I went to an unfamiliar spot on the Tisza River.
Thinking that the water was deep, I dived in.
It was a big mistake!
I broke three vertebrae in my neck and damaged my spinal cord.
My friend saw that I was not moving and carefully raised me and pulled me out before I drowned.
I remained conscious and knew that something was seriously wrong.
Someone called the emergency services, and a helicopter arrived and carried me to a hospital, where doctors stabilized my spine.
Later, I was transferred to the capital city, Budapest, for rehabilitation.
I stayed on my back for three months.
Although I was able to move my head, I had no muscle control from my shoulders down.
At 20 years of age, I had become completely dependent on others.
I felt so discouraged that I wanted to die.
When at last I was able to go home, my parents received training so that they could care for me.
But the work was hard on them physically and emotionally, and after about a year, I descended into depression.
At that point, I received professional counseling, which helped me to change the way I viewed my disability.
I also started to think more deeply about life.
Does it have a purpose?
Why did this tragedy happen to me?
I read magazines and books in a search for answers.
I also tried reading the Bible, but I found it hard to understand.
So it went back on the shelf.
I even had a talk with a priest, but I found his comments unsatisfying.
Then, in the spring of 1994, two of Jehovah’s Witnesses visited my father, and he asked them to speak to me.
I listened as they described God’s purpose to make the earth into a paradise and to eliminate sickness and suffering.
It all sounded very good, but I was skeptical.
Still, I accepted two Bible study aids.
After I read the books, the Witnesses offered to study the Bible with me, and I consented.
They also encouraged me to pray.
I became convinced that God really does care about me
As our discussions progressed, I received answers to my many questions straight from the Bible.
I also became convinced that God really does care about me.
Finally, on September 13, 1997, after studying the Bible for two years, I was baptized at home in a bathtub.
It was one of the happiest days of my life.
In 2007, I moved permanently to Budapest to a home for the disabled.
This move has given me many opportunities to share with others the wonderful things I have learned.
In good weather, I can even go outside to talk to people, thanks to a specially adapted motorized wheelchair that I steer with my chin.
With the generous financial assistance of a family in my congregation, I was also able to obtain a laptop computer that operates by tracking my head movements.
This device allows me to telephone people via the Internet and write letters to householders who were away when members of my congregation called on their homes.
Helping others in this way has improved my communication skills considerably and has helped me to take my mind off myself.
Miklós Aleksza using modern technology to communicate
Sharing the Bible’s message over the Internet with the aid of a device that tracks my head movements
I am even able to attend Christian meetings.
When I arrive at the Kingdom Hall, my spiritual brothers carefully carry me in my wheelchair up one floor to the meeting location.
During meetings, when the audience is invited to comment, the brother sitting next to me raises his hand for me.
He then holds my Bible or study aid while I make my comment.
I am in constant pain and need others to do nearly everything for me.
So I still feel emotionally down at times.
But I find comfort in my friendship with Jehovah God, knowing that he listens when I pour out my concerns to him.
I also gain strength through daily Bible reading and from my spiritual brothers and sisters.
Their friendship, emotional support, and prayers in my behalf help me to maintain mental and emotional balance.
Jehovah gave me comfort just when I needed it most.
He also gave me the hope of perfect health in a new world.
Hence, I yearn for the time when I can ‘walk and leap and praise him’ for his extraordinary love and kindness.
Acts 3:6-9.
What Does the Bible Say About Caregiving for Elderly Parents?
Adult children have the important responsibility of making sure that their elderly parents are cared for.
The Bible says that adult children should "put their religion into practice by caring for their own family and so repaying their parents . . . , for this is pleasing to God. " (1 Timothy 5:4, New International Version) When adult children see to it that their elderly parents are taken care of, they also obey the Bible’s command to honor their parents.
Ephesians 6:2, 3.
The Bible does not contain specific instructions on caring for aging parents.
However, it provides examples of men and women of faith who did so.
It also offers practical advice that can help caregivers.
How did some family members care for elderly parents in Bible times?
What practical advice from the Bible can help caregivers?
Does the Bible say that elderly parents must be cared for at home?
They did so in a variety of ways, depending on the circumstances.
Joseph lived far from his aging father, Jacob.
When Joseph was able to, he arranged for Jacob to move closer to him.
Joseph then housed, fed, and protected his father.
Genesis 45:9-11; 47:11, 12.
Ruth migrated to her mother-in-law’s country and worked tirelessly to care for her.
Ruth 1:16; 2:2, 17, 18, 23.
Jesus, shortly before he died, designated a caregiver for his mother, Mary, who was apparently then a widow.
John 19:26, 27.
The Bible contains principles that can help caregivers deal with the sometimes physically and emotionally exhausting challenge of caring for elderly parents.
Honor your parents.
What the Bible says: "Honor your father and your mother. "
Exodus 20:12. How can the principle be applied?
Show your parents honor by allowing them to maintain as much independence as their limitations permit.
To the extent possible, let them make their own decisions about their care.
At the same time, show them honor by doing what you reasonably can to assist them.
Be understanding and forgiving.
What the Bible says: "The insight of a man certainly slows down his anger, and it is beauty on his part to overlook an offense. "
Proverbs 19:11.
How can the principle be applied?
If an elderly parent says something unkind or seems unappreciative of your care, ask yourself, ‘How would I feel if I faced similar limitations and frustrations?’
When you try to be understanding and forgiving, you may avoid making a bad situation worse.
Consult others.
What the Bible says: "Plans fail when there is no consultation, but there is accomplishment through many advisers. "
Proverbs 15:22.
Do research on how to manage the health problems your parents may have.
Find out what resources are available in your community to help with their care.
Talk with others who have cared for elderly parents.
If you have siblings, consider having a family meeting to discuss your parents’ needs, how to care for them, and how to share the load.
An elderly woman meets with her family to discuss her care
Consider having a family meeting to discuss the care of elderly parents
Be modest.
What the Bible says: "Wisdom is with the modest ones. "
Proverbs 11:2.
Recognize your limitations.
For example, everyone has limited time and energy.
These limitations can affect how much you are realistically able to do for your parents.
If you find yourself overwhelmed with the demands of caring for elderly parents, consider asking for help from other family members or from professionals.
Look after yourself.
What the Bible says: "No man ever hated his own body, but he feeds and cherishes it. "
Ephesians 5:29.
Although you have a responsibility to take care of your parents, you also have to care for your needs and those of your own family if you are married.
You need to eat well.
You have to get adequate rest and sleep.
(Ecclesiastes 4:6) And you need to take breaks when possible.
By doing these things, you will be in a better position emotionally, mentally, and physically to care for your parents.
The Bible contains no specific direction on whether adult children must care for parents at home.
Some families choose to keep their aged parents at home for as long as possible.
At some point, though, they may feel that nursing-home care is a better option.
The family might meet together to decide what is best for everyone involved.
Galatians 6:4, 5.
When Your Child Is Disabled
CARLO: "Our son, Angelo, has Down syndrome.
His illness drains our physical, mental, and emotional strength.
Imagine the energy you need to look after a healthy child, and then multiply that by a hundred.
Sometimes our marriage suffers. "
MIA: "It takes persistence and a tremendous amount of patience to teach Angelo the simplest things.
When I get really tired, I tend to get irritable and impatient with my husband, Carlo.
Sometimes we disagree on issues, and then we get into an argument. "
Can you recall the day that your child was born?
You were no doubt eager to hold the baby.
For parents like Carlo and Mia, however, joy becomes mingled with anxiety when they are told that their child is sick or disabled.
Do you have a disabled child?
Then you may wonder if you can cope.
If so, do not despair.
Parents like you have successfully dealt with similar problems.
Consider three common challenges you might face and how the wisdom found in the Bible can help you.
CHALLENGE 1: YOU FIND IT DIFFICULT TO ACCEPT THE DIAGNOSIS.
Many parents feel crushed when they learn that their child is ill.
"When the doctors told me that our son, Santiago, had cerebral palsy, I couldn’t believe it, " says Juliana, a mother in Mexico.
"I felt that the world was falling in on me. "
Others may feel as did an Italian mother named Villana.
"I chose to have a baby even though there are risks for women my age, " she says.
"Now, when my son faces problems related to his Down syndrome, I feel guilty. "
If you struggle with feelings of despair or guilt, realize that your reaction is normal.
Sickness was not part of God’s original purpose.
(Genesis 1:27, 28) He did not create parents with the ability to accept easily what is unnatural.
In a sense, you may need to "grieve " for what was lost the health of your child.
It will take time to sort out your emotions and adapt to your new situation.
What if you feel responsible for your child’s disability?
Remember that no one understands fully how heredity, environment, and other factors affect a child’s health.
On the other hand, you may feel inclined to blame your spouse. Resist that urge.
You will do better if you cooperate with your mate and concentrate on caring for your child.
Ecclesiastes 4:9, 10.
SUGGESTION: Learn about your child’s condition.
"It takes wisdom to have a good family, " the Bible says, "and it takes understanding to make it strong. "
Proverbs 24:3, New Century Version.
You can learn much from medical professionals and reliable publications.
You might compare the process of learning about your child’s condition to mastering a new language.
At first, it will be difficult, but you can learn it.
Carlo and Mia, quoted in the introduction, sought information from their doctor and an organization that specializes in their son’s condition.
"This helped us to understand not only the problems that we could expect but also the ‘positive’ aspects of Down syndrome, " they say.
"We saw that our son could lead a life that in many respects would be normal.
This comforted us a lot. "
TRY THIS: Focus on what your child can do.
Plan to engage in activities as a family.
When your child achieves even a small "victory, " be quick to offer commendation and share in his or her joy.
CHALLENGE 2: YOU FEEL EXHAUSTED AND EMOTIONALLY ISOLATED.
You may feel that caring for your sick child consumes all your energy.
Jenney, a mother in New Zealand, says, "For a few years after my son was diagnosed with spina bifida, I would be exhausted and weepy if I tried to do anything extra around the home. "
Another challenge may be that you feel isolated.
Ben has a son who suffers from muscular dystrophy and Asperger’s syndrome.
Ben says, "Most people will never really understand what our life is like. "
You may long to talk with someone. Yet, most of your friends have healthy children.
So you feel reluctant to confide in them.
SUGGESTION: Ask for help. And accept it when it is offered.
Juliana, quoted earlier, admits, "Sometimes my husband and I are embarrassed to ask for help. "
However, she adds, "We have learned that we are not self-sufficient.
When others help us, we don’t feel so alone. "
If a close friend or family member offers to sit with your child at a social event or a Christian meeting, accept gratefully.
"A true companion is loving all the time, " says a Bible proverb, "and is a brother that is born for when there is distress. "
Proverbs 17:17.
Take care of your own health.
Just as an ambulance must refuel regularly if it is to continue taking patients to the hospital, you must restore your energy with proper nutrition, exercise, and rest so that you can continue giving your child the care he or she deserves.
Javier, who has a crippled son, puts it this way: "My son cannot walk, so I feel that I should try to eat well. After all, I am the one who moves him around.
My feet are his feet! "
How can you find time to look after your health?
Some parents take turns caring for their child.
One parent is thus able to rest or care for other personal needs.
You will need to buy out time from nonessential activities, and it can be a challenge to maintain a balance.
But as Mayuri, a mother in India, says, "Eventually you get into a routine. "
Talk to a trustworthy friend.
Even friends who do not have sick children can be empathetic listeners.
You can also pray to Jehovah God.
Will prayer really help?
Yazmin has two children with cystic fibrosis, and she admits, "There have been moments of such intense pressure that I have felt like I was choking to death. "
Yet, she adds: "I pray to Jehovah for relief and strength. Then I feel that I can carry on. "
Psalm 145:18.
TRY THIS: Review what you eat, when you exercise, and how much sleep you are getting.
Identify how you could buy out time from less-important tasks so that you can care for your health.
Keep adjusting your schedule as needed.
CHALLENGE 3: YOU GIVE YOUR SICK CHILD MORE ATTENTION THAN YOU GIVE THE REST OF THE FAMILY.
A child’s illness may affect what the family eats, where the family goes, and how much time parents spend with each child.
As a result, the other children may feel neglected.
Furthermore, parents can become so busy caring for their sick child that their marriage suffers.
"Sometimes my wife says that she is shouldering most of the burden and that I couldn’t care less about our son, " says Lionel, a father in Liberia.
"I feel belittled, and sometimes I respond unkindly. "
SUGGESTION: To reassure all your children that you are interested in them, plan activities that they enjoy.
"At times, we do something special for our eldest son, " says Jenney, quoted earlier, "even if we just have lunch at his favorite restaurant. "
Show interest in all your children
To protect your marriage, talk to and pray with your mate.
Aseem, a father in India whose son suffers from seizures, says: "Though my wife and I sometimes feel strained and frustrated, we make it a point to sit down, talk, and pray together.
Each morning, before our children wake up, we spend time together discussing a verse from the Bible. "
Other couples talk privately before going to sleep.
Your intimate conversations and sincere prayers will strengthen your marriage during periods of intense stress.
(Proverbs 15:22) As one couple put it, "some of the sweetest moments of our life together have been during the most difficult days. "
TRY THIS: Commend your other children for any support that they give to your ill child.
Regularly express your love and appreciation for them and for your mate.
REMAIN OPTIMISTIC
The Bible promises that soon God will remove every disease and disability that plagues both young and old.
(Revelation 21:3, 4) In that day, "no resident will say: ‘I am sick.’
" Isaiah 33:24.
In the meantime, you can succeed as the parent of a disabled child.
"Don’t be discouraged when it seems that everything is going wrong, " say Carlo and Mia, quoted earlier.
"Concentrate on the wonderful things about your child, because there are many of them. "
ASK YOURSELF . . .
What do I do to keep my own physical, emotional, and spiritual health as strong as possible?
When was the last time I commended my other children for the help they give?
What if My Parent Is Sick?
Most young people don’t worry about caregiving.
After all, it could be years before their parents develop health problems.
But what if your dad or mom becomes ill while you’re still growing up?
Consider two young people who faced that challenge.
Emmaline’s story
Emily’s story
Emmaline
My mom has Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), a chronic and painful condition that affects the joints, skin, and blood vessels.
There is no cure for the illness, and my mom’s condition has worsened over the past ten years.
In fact, there have been times when her blood count was so low that her life was in danger or when the pain was so bad that she didn’t want to live anymore.
My family and I are Jehovah’s Witnesses, and our congregation has been so comforting to all of us!
For example, recently a girl who is about my age sent a card to our family to tell us how much she loves us and to assure us that we can always count on her support.
It’s so nice to have someone like that as a friend!
The Bible has been a tremendous help to me.
For example, one of my favorite scriptures is Psalm 34:18, which says: "Jehovah is close to the brokenhearted. "
Another is Hebrews 13:6, which says: "Jehovah is my helper; I will not be afraid. "
I find that last scripture to be especially meaningful.
My biggest fear is that I will lose my mom in death.
I love her so much, and I’m thankful for each day I have with her.
That Bible verse helps me realize that I can face the future with confidence, no matter what it might bring.
Emmaline and her mother work together in the kitchen
But I have another fear.
You see, EDS is hereditary.
My mom got it from her mom, and I got it from mine.
That’s right​ I too have EDS.
But Hebrews 13:6 assures me that Jehovah will be "my helper " in this area as well.
In the meantime, I try to appreciate what I have now and not live in the past​ or worry about the future.
I can get depressed if I compare my mom’s limitations with what she used to be able to do.
The Bible says that the trials we face are "momentary and light " compared to the hope of everlasting life without sickness.​ 2 Corinthians 4:​17; Revelation 21:​1-4.
To think about: What helps Emmaline keep a positive attitude?
How can you remain positive when facing hardship?
Emily
When I was in high school, my dad had his first bout with depression.
It was as if my old dad disappeared and a new man took his place.
Since that time, my dad has been plagued with sadness, irrational fears, and anxiety attacks.
He has been dealing with this for 15 years now.
How painful it must be for him to be overwhelmed with sadness, even though he knows there is absolutely no logical reason to feel that way!
We are Jehovah’s Witnesses, and the congregation we associate with has been very supportive.
Our fellow believers have been so kind and understanding, and no one has ever made my dad feel that he isn’t useful to the congregation.
Seeing how my dad is enduring this trial makes me love him more deeply than ever.
I miss my old dad​ the one who wasn’t overwhelmed with anxiety, who didn’t suffer, who was happy.
I feel horrible that he has to battle daily with an unseen enemy inside his own mind.
Nevertheless, my dad works very hard to maintain a good outlook.
During one recent dark period, he made it a point to read a little bit of the Bible each day, even if it was just a few verses.
That strengthened him greatly.
Even such a seemingly small routine was a lifesaver.
I was never prouder of my father than during that dark time.
Emily and her father enjoy a snack together
I really like the scripture at Nehemiah 8:​10, which says: "The joy of Jehovah is your stronghold. "
That’s so true.
The joy I feel when I am in the middle of the congregation, participating and being fully active, helps fill my heart when there are holes in it.
It gives me a warm glow that I can feel for the whole day.
My dad’s example has taught me that no matter what battle you face, Jehovah will always be there to support you.
To think about: How has Emily supported her dad through his illness?
How can you help someone who is suffering from depression?
When a Loved One Is Terminally Ill
DOREEN was shocked when her husband, Wesley, only 54 years of age, was diagnosed with an acutely aggressive brain tumor.
Doctors gave him only a few months to live.
"I couldn’t believe what I was hearing, " she recalls.
"I was totally numb for weeks.
It felt as if it were happening to someone else, not to us.
I was not prepared. "
Sadly, Doreen’s reaction is not uncommon.
A terminal disease can afflict anyone at any time.
Commendably, many willingly take on the task of caring for a loved one who is diagnosed with a terminal illness.
Yet, caregiving is a formidable challenge.
What can family members do to comfort and care for their terminally ill loved one?
How can caregivers cope with the range of emotions they may experience throughout the course of the illness?
As death approaches, what can be expected?
First, though, let us consider why caring for the terminally ill is a unique challenge today.
A MODERN DILEMMA
Medical science has changed the nature of dying.
A century or so ago, even in more developed lands, the average life span was much shorter.
People died quickly from infectious diseases or accidents.
Access to hospitals was limited, and most people were cared for by their families and died at home.
Today, medical advances have enabled physicians to fight illness aggressively in order to prolong life.
Diseases that would have ended a person’s life quickly in times past may now stretch out over many years.
However, this extended life may not represent a cure.
Patients often have severe infirmities that render them incapable of caring for themselves.
Caring for such individuals has become much more complicated and demanding.
Consequently, more and more, death has moved from the home to the hospital.
Most people today are unfamiliar with the dying process, and few have ever actually witnessed someone dying.
Fear of the unknown, then, may hinder or even paralyze a person’s efforts to care for an ill family member.
What can help?
PLAN IN ADVANCE
As illustrated in the case of Doreen, many people feel devastated when a loved one is diagnosed with a fatal illness.
Amid intense anxiety, fear, and grief, what can help you to prepare for the road ahead?
A faithful servant of God prayed: "Teach us how to count our days so that we may acquire a heart of wisdom. "
(Psalm 90:12) Yes, pray earnestly for Jehovah God to show you how to ‘count your days’ wisely so that you can use the remaining days with your loved one in the best possible way.
This takes good planning.
If your loved one is still able to communicate and is willing to address the matter, it may be wise to ask him who should make decisions for him when he is no longer able to do so.
Frank discussion about whether he wishes to be resuscitated, hospitalized, or submitted to certain treatments can minimize misunderstandings and feelings of guilt on the part of family members who are forced to make decisions for an incapacitated patient.
Early and open communication allows the family to focus on providing care during the illness.
"Plans fail when there is no consultation, " says the Bible.
HOW TO ASSIST
Usually, the caretaker’s primary role is to provide comfort.
A dying person needs to be reassured that he is loved and not alone.
How can this be done?
Read or sing to the patient, choosing literature and songs that are upbuilding and enjoyable to him.
Many people are comforted when a family member holds their hand and speaks softly to them.
It is often helpful to identify any visitors.
One report states: "Hearing is said to be the last of the five senses to be lost.
Hearing may still remain very acute although the [patients] may seem asleep so do not say anything in their presence you would not say to them when awake. "
If possible, pray together.
The Bible relates that on one occasion, the apostle Paul and his companions were under extreme pressure and were very uncertain even of their lives.
What assistance did they seek?
Paul entreated his friends: "You also can help us by your supplication for us. " (2 Corinthians 1:8-11) A heartfelt prayer during extreme stress and serious illness is invaluable.
ACKNOWLEDGE THE REALITY
The very notion of a loved one dying is often distressing.
No wonder, for death is unnatural.
We were not designed to accept death as a normal part of life.
(Romans 5:12) God’s Word thus calls death an "enemy. " (1 Corinthians 15:26) So a reluctance to think about the death of a loved one is understandable, even normal.
Nevertheless, anticipating what may occur can help family members to ease their fears and focus on making things as comfortable as possible.
Some of the events that may take place are listed in the box " The Final Weeks of Life. "
Of course, not all these conditions occur in every patient, nor do they necessarily occur in the same order.
Still, most patients experience at least some of these changes.
After the death of a loved one, it may be wise to contact a close friend who has previously agreed to help.
Caregivers and family may need to be assured that their dear one’s trial is over and that he is no longer suffering.
The Creator of humankind lovingly assures us that "the dead know nothing at all. "
Ecclesiastes 9:5.
THE ULTIMATE CAREGIVER
A woman visits a terminally ill person in the hospital
We can learn not to turn anyone’s help away
Relying upon God is essential not only during the terminal illness of a family member but also during the grief that comes following death.
He may assist you through the helpful words and deeds of others.
"I learned not to turn anyone’s help away, " says Doreen.
"In fact, the volume of help we received overwhelmed us.
I will never forget it. "
Yes, Jehovah God is the ultimate Caregiver.
As our Maker, he understands our pain and sorrow.
He is able and eager to provide the necessary help and encouragement so that we can cope.
Better yet, he has promised that he will soon eradicate death once and for all and resurrect the billions of humans who are in his memory.
(John 5:28, 29; Revelation 21:3, 4) Then, all can echo the words of the apostle Paul: "Death, where is your victory?
Death, where is your sting? " 1 Corinthians 15:55.
THE FINAL WEEKS OF LIFE
It is common for a patient to exhibit some or all of the following symptoms during the final weeks of life :
Little interest in eating and drinking.
Swabbing glycerin on the mouth and lips and placing a moist washcloth on the forehead may keep the patient comfortable.
Desire to be alone or with very few people.
Keep the environment quiet and calm.
Increased amount of time sleeping.
Restlessness.
Rather than restraining restless motions, speak calmly and reassuringly with the person.
Disorientation.
Identify yourself by name, and listen with respect even if the person seems confused.
Incontinence.
Keep the patient and his bed clean to the extent possible.
Breathing changes.
A moaning sound while exhaling may merely be air passing over relaxed vocal chords.
Congestion.
Raising the head with pillows may help to prevent the patient from gagging.
Skin color changes.
These are often due to the body’s directing blood to the core to support vital organs.
When a Spouse Has Special Needs
Play Current time 0:00
Duration 0:00 Mute
Since I was diagnosed with chronic fatigue syndrome, my husband has had to do all the secular work. But he never talks to me about our bills.
Why does he leave me completely in the dark like this?
Our finances must be in such bad shape that he knows I’ll panic if I find out.​ Nancy.
MARRIAGE can be a challenge, but when one mate becomes chronically ill while the other remains healthy, complications can multiply.
Are you caring for an infirm mate?
If so, do any of the following questions worry you: ‘How will I cope if my mate’s health declines even further?
How long can I continue to take care of my mate and also do all the cooking, cleaning, and secular work?
Why do I feel guilty for being the healthy one?’
On the other hand, if you are the ailing spouse, you might wonder: ‘How can I respect myself when I’m unable to carry my load of responsibility?
Does my mate resent me for being sick?
Is our happiness as a couple over?’
Sadly, some marriages have not survived the strain caused by a chronic illness.
Yet, this does not mean that your marriage is doomed to failure.
Many couples survive and even thrive despite the presence of a chronic ailment.
Consider, for example, Yoshiaki and Kazuko.
A spinal injury rendered Yoshiaki unable to make even the slightest movement without assistance.
Kazuko explains: "My husband needs assistance with everything.
As a result of caring for him, my neck, shoulders, and arms ache, and I am an outpatient at an orthopedic hospital.
I often feel that caregiving is overwhelming. "
Despite the difficulties, however, Kazuko says: "Our bond as a couple has become stronger. "
What, then, is the key to happiness under such circumstances?
For one thing, those who retain a healthy measure of satisfaction and contentment in their marriage view the illness as an assault not only on the ailing spouse but on the two of them as a couple.
After all, if one mate is sick, both are deeply affected, even if in different ways.
This interdependent relationship between a husband and wife is described at Genesis 2:24: "A man will leave his father and his mother and he must stick to his wife and they must become one flesh. "
Thus, when a spouse has an ongoing physical ailment, it is critical that both husband and wife work together to meet the challenge.
Additionally, research shows that couples who maintain a good relationship in the face of chronic illness accept their situation and learn effective ways to adapt to it.
Many of the coping skills that they have learned echo the timeless advice found in the Bible.
Consider the following three suggestions.
Show Consideration for One Another
"Two are better than one, " states Ecclesiastes 4:9.
Because, explains verse 10, "if one of them should fall, the other one can raise his partner up. "
Do you ‘raise your partner up’ with expressions of appreciation?
Are you able to look for ways to be of practical assistance to each other?
Yong, whose wife is partially paralyzed, says: "I try to be considerate of my wife on every occasion.
Whenever I feel thirsty, I consider that she too might be thirsty.
If I want to go outside and view the beautiful scenery, I ask her if she would like to join me.
We are sharing the pain and enduring the situation together. "
On the other hand, if you are receiving care from your mate, are there certain things that you can do for yourself without threatening your health?
If so, this can boost your feelings of self-worth and may contribute to your mate’s ability to continue providing care.
Rather than assume that you know the best way to show consideration for your spouse, why not ask him or her what would be most appreciated?
Nancy, mentioned at the outset, eventually told her husband how she was affected by not knowing the family’s financial status.
Now her husband endeavors to be more communicative in this regard.
TRY THIS: List ways that you feel your mate can make your present situation a little easier, and have your spouse do the same.
Then switch lists.
Each of you should select one or two suggestions that can realistically be implemented.
Have a Balanced Schedule
"For everything there is an appointed time, " wrote wise King Solomon.
(Ecclesiastes 3:1) However, it may seem impossible to maintain a balanced schedule, given the disrupting effect that a chronic sickness can have on a family’s routine.
What can you do to achieve at least a measure of balance?
Together you might take regular breaks from serious medical concerns.
Can you still enjoy some of the things you shared before illness struck?
If not, what new activities can you try?
It could be something as simple as reading to each other or as challenging as learning a new language.
Having a life together outside the illness will strengthen your "one flesh " bond​ and increase your happiness.
Another aid to maintaining balance is being in the company of others.
The Bible states at Proverbs 18:1: "One isolating himself will seek his own selfish longing; against all practical wisdom he will break forth. "
Did you note in that verse that isolation can have an undesirable effect on the mind?
By contrast, periodic association with others can lift your spirits and help restore mental perspective.
Why not take the initiative to invite someone to visit you?
At times, balance becomes a problem for caregiving spouses.
Some take on too much work, slowly wear down, and endanger their own health.
Eventually, they may even render themselves unable to continue providing care for their beloved mate.
So if you are taking care of a chronically ill spouse, do not ignore your personal needs.
Set aside regular quiet time to refresh yourself.
Some have found it therapeutic to talk out their anxieties from time to time with a trusted friend of the same sex.
TRY THIS: List on paper the obstacles you face in taking care of your mate.
Then make a list of steps you might take to overcome these or to cope with them more effectively.
Instead of overanalyzing them, ask yourself, ‘What is the simplest, most obvious way to improve the situation?’
Try to Maintain a Positive Outlook
The Bible warns: "Do not say: ‘Why has it happened that the former days proved to be better than these?’ " (Ecclesiastes 7:10) So avoid dwelling on what might have been.
Remember that in this world, all happiness is limited in some way.
The key here is to accept your situation and make the best of it.
What can help you and your mate in this regard?
Discuss your blessings together.
Take delight in even the smallest improvements in your health.
Find things to look forward to, and set reachable goals together.
A couple named Shoji and Akiko have applied the above advice with good results.
At one point after Akiko was diagnosed with fibromyalgia, they had to leave a special assignment in the full-time Christian ministry.
Were they disappointed?
Naturally.
Yet, Shoji advises any in similar circumstances: "Do not discourage yourself by thinking about things that you can no longer do.
Keep a positive outlook.
Even if you both have the hope of returning to a normal routine someday, concentrate for now on your life as it is.
For me, that means focusing my attention on my wife and helping her. "
Such practical advice can help you too if your spouse has special needs.
What do my mate and I most need to do right now?
Talk more about the illness
Talk less about the illness
Worry less
Show more consideration for each other
Have a mutual interest outside the illness
Have more social contact
Have mutual goals
What You Should Know About Mental Disorders
"I felt as though I had my breath knocked out of me, " says Claudia, who had just been told she had bipolar disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder.
"Dealing with the stigma of a mental illness seemed overwhelming. "
"It took a long time to come to terms with our situation, " says Claudia’s husband, Mark.
"But I realized that I had to focus on supporting my wife. "
IF YOU or someone you love were diagnosed with a mental disorder, how would you feel?
Thankfully, mental illness can be treated.
Let us examine a few things you should know that will give you a better understanding of mental disorders.
Key Facts About Mental Health
"Mental disorders afflict hundreds of millions of people in every part of the world and impact on the lives of their loved ones.
One in four people will be affected by mental disorder at some point in their lives.
Depression is the single largest contributor to worldwide disability.
Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder are among the most severe and disabling disorders. . . .
Although huge numbers of people are affected, mental disorders remain hidden, neglected and discriminated against. "
World Health Organization (WHO).
According to WHO, many people with mental illness refrain from seeking treatment because of the stigma associated with it.
Although most mental disorders are treatable, in the United States approximately 60 percent of adults and almost 50 percent of youths aged 8 to 15 with a mental disorder did not receive treatment in the past year, reports the National Alliance on Mental Illness.
Understanding Mental Disorders
A woman with a mental disorder What is mental illness?
Experts define a mental disorder as a significant dysfunction in a person’s thinking, emotional control, and behavior.
The condition often disrupts a person’s ability to relate to others and to deal with the demands of life.
Mental-health disorders are not the result of personal weakness or a character flaw
The severity of symptoms can vary in length and intensity, depending on the individual and the particular ailment and circumstances.
It can affect people of any gender, age, culture, race, religion, or educational and income level.
Mental-health disorders are not the result of personal weakness or a character flaw.
Through appropriate medical care, individuals can be treated and can live a productive and fulfilling life.
Treating Mental Disorders
Mental-health professionals can treat many mental-health disorders successfully.
The first crucial step, then, is to obtain a thorough assessment from a competent health professional who is experienced in treating mental conditions.
A woman with a mental disorder talking with a qualified health professional
Sufferers, however, can benefit from such experience only when they accept suitable treatment.
This may require overcoming any reluctance to talk to others about a mental illness.
Treatment may include talking to trained mental-health professionals who can help them understand their illness, resolve practical problems, and reinforce the need not to give up the treatment.
At such consultations, a family member or friend can play a vital role by providing reassurance and support.
Many people have learned to deal with mental disorders after acquiring a better understanding of their condition and following the treatment prescribed by mental-health professionals.
"Before my wife was diagnosed, " says Mark, quoted earlier, "we had little understanding of mental illness.
But we’ve learned to take life one step at a time and adapt to our situation.
Over time, we have benefited from the support of reliable professionals as well as family and friends. "
The first crucial step is to obtain a thorough medical assessment from a competent health professional
Claudia agrees.
"In the beginning, my diagnosis felt like a prison sentence, " she admits.
"But even though my illness places limitations on both of us, I have learned that seemingly impossible hurdles can be overcome.
So I cope with my mental illness by working together with my treatment team, nurturing relationships with others, and taking one moment at a time. "
Spiritual Health Is Vital
A woman reading the Bible
The Bible does not indicate that spirituality cures medical problems.
Still, many families around the world have derived much comfort and strength from what the Bible teaches.
For instance, the Bible assures us that our loving Creator is keenly interested in consoling those who are "brokenhearted " and "crushed in spirit. "
Psalm 34:18.
While the Bible is not a health-care book, it provides practical guidance that can help us to cope with painful emotions and distressing circumstances.
The Bible can also give us hope for a future when life on earth will be free of illness and pain.
God’s Word promises: "At that time the eyes of the blind will be opened, and the ears of the deaf will be unstopped. At that time the lame will leap like the deer, and the tongue of the speechless will shout for joy. "
Isaiah 35:5, 6.
LIVING WITH MENTAL ILLNESS
"There are times when the feeling of panic makes some activities seem impossible, and there are days when I can’t even concentrate well enough to read.
At other times, the darkness of depression makes me avoid contact with others, even good friends.
Some try to help by suggesting that things will get better soon or that things aren’t as bad as I think they are.
Others tell me to look on the brighter side of life.
But I have tried to do that countless times!
Even though comments like these are well-meant, they simply increase the feelings of inadequacy, guilt, and failure I already experience. "
Claudia, South Africa.
DEALING WITH MENTAL DISORDERS
Follow the treatment prescribed by qualified mental-health professionals.
Maintain a balanced and stable daily routine.
Stay physically active.
Get enough sleep.
Take time each day to relax.
Eat a nutritious and balanced diet.
Limit alcohol consumption and drugs that are not prescribed for you.
Avoid isolation; spend time with people whom you trust and who care for you.
Give attention to your spiritual needs.
Diabetes Can You Reduce Your Risk?
THE incidence of diabetes mellitus is increasing so quickly that it has become a global epidemic.
There are two major types of diabetes.
Type 1 starts mainly in childhood, and presently doctors do not know how to prevent it.
This article is about type 2, which accounts for about 90 percent of all diabetes.
While in the past it was seen as exclusive to adults, more recently type 2 diabetes has also been affecting children.
Experts claim, however, that the risk of type 2 diabetes can be reduced.
A little knowledge of this insidious disease may prove helpful to you.
What Is Diabetes?
Diabetes is a condition that causes a person to have an excessive level of blood sugar.
The disease upsets the normal process of transferring sugar from the bloodstream into cells that need it for energy.
The result is damage to vital organs and impairment of blood circulation, sometimes leading to toe or foot amputation, blindness, and kidney disease.
A large proportion of diabetes patients die of heart attacks or stroke.
Excess body fat can be a major factor in type 2 diabetes.
Experts believe that fat accumulated in the belly and waist may indicate a higher risk for diabetes.
More specifically, fat in the pancreas and the liver appear to disrupt the body’s regulation of blood sugar.
What can you do to reduce your risk?
Three Steps That May Reduce the Risk of Diabetes
Have your level of blood sugar tested if you are in a high-risk group.
A medical disorder known as prediabetes a condition in which blood sugar is moderately higher than normal often precedes type 2 diabetes.
Both conditions are unhealthy, but there is a difference: Although diabetes can be controlled, it cannot yet be cured.
On the other hand, some prediabetics have been able to bring their blood sugar back to normal levels.
Prediabetes may have no obvious symptoms.
Hence, this condition may go unnoticed.
According to reports, about 316 million people around the world have prediabetes; yet, many of them do not realize it.
For instance, in the United States alone, some 90 percent of prediabetes sufferers are unaware of their condition.
Prediabetes is not harmless, however.
Besides being a precursor to type 2 diabetes, it has recently been linked to an increased risk of dementia.
If you are overweight, not physically active, or have a family history of diabetes, you might already have prediabetes.
A blood test can tell you if you do.
Choose healthful food.
You might benefit from doing the following whenever it is possible and practical: Eat smaller portions than usual.
Instead of sugary fruit juice and carbonated beverages, drink water, tea, or coffee.
Eat whole-grain bread, rice, and pasta in moderation rather than refined foods.
Eat leaner meats, fish, nuts, and beans.
A healthy salad; 2.
Measuring a person’s weight on a scale
Exercise can lower your blood sugar and help you maintain a healthy weight.
Swap some TV time for exercise time, recommends one expert.
You cannot change your genes, but you can change your lifestyle.
Doing what we can to improve our health is worth the effort.
‘I Took Action!’
An Interview
How did you realize that you were in danger of developing diabetes?
When I had a medical checkup for a new job, the doctor told me that I would soon be diabetic if I didn’t take urgent action.
I had four factors against me: I was from a high-risk ethnic group, I had a family history of diabetes, I was overweight, and I didn’t exercise.
Since I couldn’t change the first two factors, I decided to try to change the last two.
What did you do?
I went to a diabetes counselor who explained the relationship between diet, exercise, body weight, and diabetes.
I determined to change my lifestyle.
I began eating two portions of vegetables before the rest of my meal.
That made me less hungry for the less healthful items on my plate.
I also became more physically active, something I had neglected for years.
How successful were you?
Within 18 months, I lost a tenth of my body weight, and I feel great.
I’m determined not to return to my unhealthy habits.
Diabetes is definitely not to be taken lightly!
What You Should Know About Epilepsy
AN ACQUAINTANCE falls to the ground, unconscious.
His body stiffens, and his head and limbs begin to convulse.
If you know that the person suffers from epilepsy, you can provide adequate assistance while waiting for help.
Let us explore some basic facts about this often misunderstood disorder.
What is epilepsy?
Epilepsy is a brain disorder that produces brief attacks called seizures.
The entire seizure usually lasts less than five minutes.
The situation described at the outset of this article is typical of what is called a grand mal seizure.
What causes seizures?
Researchers believe that seizures occur when there is an abnormal surge of electrical activity between brain cells.
Just why this happens remains unclear.
If I see someone with epilepsy having a grand mal seizure, what should I do?
"Bystanders should let the attack run its course and not interfere with the patient, beyond checking to make sure the person is in no physical danger and can breathe, " says The Encyclopedia of the Brain and Brain Disorders.
On the other hand, the book says: "An ambulance should be called if the seizure continues for more than five minutes, if another seizure immediately follows the first, or if the person does not regain consciousness a few minutes after the seizure ends. "
How can I help the patient while he is having a seizure?
Place a soft object between his head and the floor, and move sharp objects away from his head.
When the convulsions stop, turn the patient on his side as shown in the accompanying diagram.
What should I do after the patient awakens?
First, assure him that everything is all right.
Then help him to stand upright and guide him to a place where he can get needed rest.
Most people are confused and sleepy after a seizure; others recover quickly and can continue what they were doing before the attack.
Do all epileptic seizures include convulsions?
Some patients experience a moment of impaired awareness without even falling to the ground.
This is called a petit mal seizure (or absence seizure), which is usually brief with no lingering aftereffects.
Some people with epilepsy undergo prolonged petit mal seizures, lasting several minutes.
In such a case, the patient may wander around the room, tug at his clothing, or otherwise behave strangely.
After the seizure, he may feel light-headed.
What is it like to live with epilepsy?
Understandably, many people with epilepsy contend with a nagging fear of when and where the next seizure will occur.
To avoid embarrassment, they may tend to avoid social situations.
How can I give support to someone who has epilepsy?
Encourage him not to bottle up his feelings.
Be a good listener.
Ask him what he would like you to do if he has a seizure.
Since many people with epilepsy do not drive, perhaps you could offer a ride or run some errands for him.
Can seizures be reduced or even prevented?
Some factors increase the likelihood of a seizure, such as stress and lack of sleep.
Experts therefore encourage epileptics to get proper rest and to exercise regularly in order to reduce stress.
In some cases, medications have also been effective in preventing seizures.
Because of his epilepsy, a young man in South Africa named Sello was dismissed from school at an early age.
He grew up without an education and without medication to control his epilepsy.
But he wanted to understand the Bible, and Jehovah’s Witnesses helped him.
They not only studied the Bible with him but also taught him to read.
Additionally, a Witness medical doctor helped him get medication along with a social disability grant.
"Jehovah’s Witnesses are truly loving Christians, " says Sello, who is now a Witness himself and enjoys sharing with others God’s promise of a new world where sickness will be no more.
Revelation 21:3-5.
The Recovery Position
After convulsing has stopped . . .
Kneel beside the patient and bend his arm at the elbow, pointing it upward
Gently tuck the hand of the patient’s other arm underneath his cheek
With your other hand, pull the patient’s knee toward you, slowly rolling him over.
Then move the patient’s knee in front of his body so that it rests on the floor
Tilt the patient’s head up to allow for unobstructed breathing
Gum Disease Are You at Risk?
IT IS one of the most common oral diseases in the world.
Yet, this disease in its initial stages may not cause any immediate symptoms.
This dangerous subtlety is characteristic of gum disease.
The International Dental Journal lists periodontal disease among oral disorders that pose "a serious public-health problem. "
It adds that the impact of oral disease "on individuals and communities in terms of pain and suffering, impairment of function and reduced quality of life, is considerable. "
A discussion of this widespread condition may help you reduce your risk of gum disease.
Facts About Gum Disease
There are different stages of gum disease.
The initial stage, called gingivitis, is an inflammation of the gums.
Bleeding gums may be a sign of this stage.
This may occur during brushing and flossing or for no apparent reason.
Also, bleeding during a gum examination may be indicative of gingivitis. Gum disease that progresses from this stage is called periodontitis.
At this point, oral structures that support your teeth, such as bone and gum tissue, begin to be destroyed.
This form of gum disease may not cause symptoms until it reaches an advanced stage.
Some signs of periodontitis may be gum pockets; loose teeth; gaps forming between teeth; bad breath; receding gums, that is, gums that are pulling away from the teeth, giving the teeth a longer appearance; and bleeding gums.
Cause and Effect of Gum Disease
Several factors can increase the risk of gum disease.
Dental plaque, which is a thin film of bacteria that regularly forms on the teeth, is the most common cause.
If plaque is not removed, the bacteria can cause gum swelling.
As this process progresses, the gums start to separate from the teeth, allowing the bacteria-laden plaque to grow under the gum line.
Once the bacteria has infiltrated to this point, the inflammatory process advances by destroying bone and gum tissue.
Dental plaque, either above or below the gum line, can harden into calculus (or what is commonly known as tartar).
Calculus is also covered with bacteria, and because of its hardness and adherence to the teeth, it is not as easily removed as plaque.
Therefore, bacteria can continue to affect the gums adversely.
There are other factors that can contribute to your risk of having gum disease.
These may include poor oral hygiene, medications that suppress the immune system, viral infections, stress, uncontrolled diabetes, excessive alcohol consumption, tobacco use, and hormonal changes because of pregnancy.
The effects of gum disease can have other implications for you.
A painful mouth or the loss of teeth from gum disease can hinder your ability to chew your food and enjoy it.
Your speech and appearance may suffer.
Also, research has shown that oral health is closely related to overall health.
Diagnosis and Treatment of Gum Disease
How do you know if you have gum disease?
You may notice some of the signs already mentioned in this article.
If you do, it may be wise to consult a qualified dental professional who can assess the health of your gums.
Is gum disease treatable?
In its early stages, gum disease may be reversed.
If gum disease progresses to the point of periodontitis, then the goal is to halt the progress of the disease before it continues to destroy the bone and tissue that surround the teeth.
Dental professionals use specialized tools that can remove plaque and calculus from your teeth, both above and below the gum line.
Even if you have limited or no access to professional dental care, the key to reducing your risk of this subtle yet potentially destructive disease is prevention.
Proper and regular oral self-care is the best prevention to reduce the risk of gum disease.
ORAL HYGIENE
A woman brushing her teeth
Brush at least twice a day.
Some may need to brush more frequently, perhaps after each meal, in order to reduce the risk of gum disease
Use a brush with soft bristles, combined with gentle, short strokes
A woman cleaning between her teeth
Gently floss daily, using either dental floss or, if necessary, a device, such as a specially designed brush or a toothpick that cleans between the teeth
Food Allergy and Food Intolerance​ What’s the Difference?
Emily: "I put down my fork and started to feel uneasy.
I had an itchy sensation in my mouth, and my tongue was swelling.
I started to feel light-headed and was having trouble breathing.
Hives were breaking out on my arms and neck.
I tried to stifle panic but knew I had to get to a hospital​ and quickly! "
FOR most people, eating is a pleasant experience.
There are some, however, who are compelled to treat certain foods as "enemies. "
Like Emily, quoted earlier, they suffer from food allergies.
Emily’s severe allergic response is called anaphylaxis, a very dangerous condition.
Thankfully, most food allergies are not as serious.
In recent years, there has been a rise in reported food allergies and intolerances.
Some studies, however, suggest that only a small portion of those who think they have a food allergy have been definitely diagnosed.
What Is a Food Allergy?
"Food allergy has no universally accepted definition, " according to a group of scientists led by Dr. Jennifer J. Schneider Chafen in their report published in The Journal of the American Medical Association.
However, most experts believe that allergic reactions are primarily triggered by the immune system.
An allergic reaction to a certain food is typically a response to a protein in that food.
The immune system erroneously identifies that protein as harmful.
When a particular protein enters the body, the immune system may create a type of antibody known as IgE to neutralize the perceived invader.
When the food allergen is again ingested, the antibodies that were created earlier can trigger a release of chemicals, including histamine.
Under normal circumstances, histamine plays a beneficial role in the immune system.
But for reasons not clearly understood, the presence of IgE antibodies and the subsequent release of histamine provoke an allergic reaction in people who happen to be hypersensitive to a particular food protein.
This explains why you could eat a new food without any apparent reaction but eat the same food again and experience an allergic reaction.
What Is Food Intolerance?
A food intolerance, like a food allergy, may be an adverse reaction to a food item.
But unlike a food allergy (which is triggered directly by the immune system), a food intolerance is a reaction of the digestive system, and thus no antibodies are involved.
Basically, a person may have trouble breaking down a food, perhaps because of enzyme deficiencies or because of chemicals found in the food that are difficult to process.
For example, a lactose intolerance occurs when the gut does not produce the needed enzymes to digest the type of sugars found in milk products.
As it is not a matter of the production of antibodies, a food intolerance can manifest itself the first time the food is ingested.
Quantity may be the determining factor​ a small amount of a certain food may be tolerated, but a problem may occur when larger amounts are ingested.
This is different from severe food allergies in which even a tiny amount of food can cause a life-threatening reaction.
Milk, eggs, crustaceans, soybeans, fish, peanuts, tree nuts, and wheat
What Are the Symptoms?
If you suffer from a food allergy, you could have itching; hives; swelling of the throat, eyes, or tongue; nausea; vomiting; or diarrhea. And in a worst-case scenario, you could have a drop in blood pressure, dizziness, fainting, and even cardiac arrest.
An anaphylactic reaction can progress rapidly and be fatal.
Potentially, any food could cause an allergy.
However, the most severe food allergies are commonly caused by just a few foods: namely, milk, eggs, fish, crustaceans, peanuts, soybeans, tree nuts, and wheat.
A person can develop an allergy at any age.
Studies show that genetics play an important role, and a child is more likely to develop an allergy if one or both of his parents have allergies.
It is not uncommon for children to grow out of allergies.
Symptoms of food intolerance are generally less alarming than those of extreme allergic reactions.
Food intolerance may cause stomach pain, bloating, gas, cramps, headaches, skin rash, tiredness, or a general feeling of malaise.
An intolerance may be related to a variety of foods​ dairy, wheat, gluten, alcohol, and yeast are among the most common.
Diagnosis and Treatment
If you think you may suffer from a food allergy or a food intolerance, you may decide to get checked by a specialized health professional.
Self-diagnosis and autonomously deciding to eliminate certain foods can at times be harmful, as you may inadvertently deprive your body of necessary nutrients.
There is no widely accepted treatment for severe food allergies other than the total avoidance of the particular foods that trigger the allergy.
On the other hand, if you have milder food allergies or food intolerance, you may see some benefit from simply reducing how often you eat certain foods and the amount.
In some cases, however, sufferers are compelled to avoid the foods in question altogether, or at least for some time, depending on the severity of the intolerance.
So if you have a food allergy or a food intolerance, you may find comfort in knowing that many sufferers have learned to manage their condition and still enjoy a wide variety of nutritious and delicious foods.
What You Should Know About Malaria
The World Health Organization estimates that in 2013, more than 198 million people were infected with malaria and an estimated 584,000 died as a result of it.
Nearly 4 out of 5 casualties were children under five years of age.
The disease presents a threat in about a hundred countries and territories throughout the world, putting some 3.2 billion people at risk.
1 WHAT IS MALARIA?
Malaria is a parasitic disease.
Its symptoms include fever, chills, sweats, headache, body aches, nausea, and vomiting.
The symptoms may sometimes recur every 48 to 72 hours, depending on the type of parasite involved and how long the person has had the disease.
2 HOW DOES MALARIA SPREAD?
A diagram of how malaria parasites spread in a human body
Malaria parasites protozoans called Plasmodia are introduced into the human bloodstream through the bite of a female Anopheles mosquito.
The parasites find their way into the infected person’s liver cells, where the parasites multiply.
When a liver cell ruptures, it releases the parasites, which then invade the infected person’s red blood cells.
There, the parasites continue to multiply.
Malaria parasites invade red blood cells and cause them to rupture
When a red blood cell ruptures, it releases the parasites, which invade still more red blood cells.
The cycle of red blood cell invasion and rupture continues.
The infected person typically manifests symptoms of malaria each time the red blood cells rupture.
3 HOW CAN YOU PROTECT YOURSELF?
If you live in a land where malaria is endemic . . .
Use a bed net or a mosquito net.
It should be
treated with insecticide.
free of any holes or tears.
tucked completely under the mattress.
Use indoor residual spraying in your home.
If possible, install screens on doors and windows, and use air-conditioners and fans, which may discourage mosquitoes from settling.
Wear light-colored clothing that fully covers your skin.
Whenever possible, avoid areas of brush, where mosquitoes swarm, and standing water, where they breed.
If you are infected, get treatment promptly.
Malaria cycle involving mosquitoes and humans
A human can get the malaria parasite from an infected mosquito.
Conversely, a noninfected mosquito can get the malaria parasite from biting an infected human.
Then the infected mosquito can pass the parasite to another human
If you are planning to visit a land where malaria is endemic . . .
Get current information before you travel.
The type of malaria parasite common in one region may differ from that in another, and this affects which type of medicine is most effective.
Also, it would be wise to speak to your physician about things you need to be aware of with regard to your personal health history.
During your visit, follow the guidelines that are presented in this article for those who live in a land where malaria is endemic.
If you become infected, get prompt treatment.
Be aware that symptoms may appear between one and four weeks after infection.
WHAT MORE YOU CAN DO
Make use of government or community health-care programs.
Obtain medication only from authorized sources.
(Poor-quality or imitation medication can prolong the illness or increase the risk of death.)
Remove mosquito-breeding sites around the home.
If you live in a malaria area or you have been in one, do not ignore the following symptoms of malaria . . .
High temperature (fever)
Sweats
Shaking chills
Headache
Muscle aches
Fatigue
Nausea
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Untreated malaria can cause severe anemia and can quickly become life threatening.
Seek medical treatment immediately, before symptoms get worse, especially in children and pregnant mothers.
DID YOU KNOW?
A stopwatch superimposed over Africa
In Africa alone, one child dies every minute from malaria
Children and pregnant women are most at risk of serious illness if they contract malaria.
In Africa alone, one child dies every minute from malaria.
In rare cases, people have contracted malaria through a blood transfusion.
Meeting the Challenges of Menopause
"Feelings of sadness overwhelmed me without reason or warning.
I cried and wondered if I was going crazy. "
Rondro, 50 years of age.
"You wake up in the morning and find your house is a mess.
You cannot find personal things.
What you had been doing with ease for years, now seems so difficult, and you don’t know why. "
Hanta, 55 years of age.
THESE women were not ill.
Rather, they were going through the menopause transition, a natural change in a woman’s life and the end of her fertility.
If you are a woman, are you approaching that time of life?
Are you going through it?
Whatever the case may be, the more that you and your loved ones know about this transition, the better equipped you will be to meet the challenges associated with it.
The Menopause Transition
The menopause transition, also called perimenopause (around menopause), includes both the period leading up to menopause and menopause itself.
In common usage, however, "menopause " often refers to the entire transition.
Most women start perimenopause in their 40’s, but some do so as late as their 60’s.
In most cases, menstruation ceases gradually.
Because of the erratic production of hormones, a woman may skip periods, bleed at odd times, or have extra-heavy periods.
A small number of women stop menstruating abruptly, almost overnight, as it were.
"Each woman’s menopause experience is different, " says Menopause Guidebook.
It also states: "The most common menopause-related discomfort is the hot flash (sometimes called a hot flush), " which may be followed by a cold chill.
Those symptoms can disrupt sleep and sap energy.
How long do the discomforts last?
According to The Menopause Book, "some women get a few hot flashes for a year or two around the time of the menopause transition.
Others suffer for many years, and a very small percentage report occasional hot flashes for the rest of their lives. "
Because of fluctuating hormones, a woman may also experience depression and mood swings, resulting in weepiness, as well as poor concentration and lapses in memory.
That said, "it’s highly unlikely that any one woman will get hit with everything, " says The Menopause Book.
Indeed, some experience few, if any, problems and discomforts.
How to Cope
Simple lifestyle changes may reduce some discomforts.
For example, smokers may decrease the number of hot flashes by giving up tobacco.
Many women also benefit from dietary changes, such as limiting or even avoiding alcohol, caffeine, and spicy or sugary foods, which can trigger hot flashes.
Of course, it is important to eat well, which means having a balanced and varied diet.
Exercise can also be a big help in reducing menopausal symptoms.
For instance, it can reduce insomnia and foster significant improvements in mood, as well as in bone strength and general health.
Communicate Openly
"There is no need to suffer in silence, " said Rondro, quoted earlier.
"If you talk openly with loved ones, they will not worry too much when they notice what is happening to you. "
In fact, they may be more patient and understanding.
"Love is patient and kind, " says 1 Corinthians 13:4. Good News Translation.
Many women also benefit from prayer, including those who are grieved by their loss of fertility.
"[God] comforts us in all our troubles, " the Bible assures us. (2 Corinthians 1:4, The New English Bible) Also comforting is the knowledge that the menopause transition is temporary.
Afterward, women who continue to take good care of their health may find renewed energy and enjoy many more years of quality life.
Depression How to Treat It
"MY HUSBAND and I have sought out medical treatment, made lifestyle changes, and worked hard to develop a routine that I can cope with, " says Ruth, who has suffered with depression for many years.
"We seem to have found an effective medication, and I am doing better.
But during the time when nothing else seemed to work, the constant love of my husband and friends helped me not to give up. "
As Ruth’s experience indicates, patients who suffer from clinical depression need all the support they can get, including whatever medical approach might be advisable.
It can be risky to ignore depression because in some cases when left untreated it can be life-threatening.
About two thousand years ago, Jesus Christ acknowledged that those with medical experience could provide needed help, when he said that ‘those who are ill need a physician.’
(Mark 2:17) The fact is that physicians can do much to alleviate the suffering of many depressed patients.
Some Helpful Options
There are a number of treatments for depression, varying according to the symptoms and the severity of the illness.
(See the box " What Kind of Depression? ")
Many people may be helped by their family physician, but some need more specialized treatment.
The doctor might prescribe antidepressant medication or recommend some other form of assistance.
Some people have experienced good results with herbal medications, dietary adjustments, or a controlled exercise program.
Common Issues
Well-meaning friends with little or no medical training might try to tell you which method of treatment to accept and which to reject.
They might also have strong opinions about whether you should take herbal medicine, prescribed medication, or nothing at all.
Consider: Make sure that any advice you accept comes from a reliable source.
In the end, you are the one who must make an informed choice.
Discouragement may make patients discontinue their choice of treatment because they do not seem to be getting better or because of unpleasant side effects.
Consider: "There is a frustrating of plans where there is no confidential talk, but in the multitude of counselors there is accomplishment. "
(Proverbs 15:22) A program of medical therapy is more likely to succeed if there is good communication between doctor and patient.
Frankly explain your concerns or describe your symptoms to your doctor, and ask whether you need to adjust the treatment or simply to persevere before you will begin to experience benefits.
Overconfidence can make patients stop their medical remedy abruptly after a few weeks because they feel better.
They may forget how debilitating their symptoms were before they started their medication.
Consider: Suddenly terminating medical treatment without consulting a doctor can have serious and even life-threatening consequences.
Though the Bible is not a medical textbook, its Author, Jehovah God, is our Creator.
The next article will examine the comfort and guidance God’s Word provides both for those who suffer from depression and for their caregivers.
WHAT KIND OF DEPRESSION?
The effectiveness of any particular medical approach depends on what type of depression a patient has.
Major depression has symptoms that are severe enough to last six months or longer if untreated and that impact on most aspects of a sufferer’s life.
Bipolar disorder is also known as manic depression.
Sufferers may experience emotional extremes that careen between prolonged episodes of intense hyperactivity (manias) and devastating lows (depressions).​ See the article "Living With a Mood Disorder, " in the January 8, 2004, issue of this magazine.
Dysthymia, although not as disabling as major depression, has depressive symptoms that make it difficult for the patient to function normally.
Some may also experience intermittent periods of major depression.
Postpartum depression is a debilitating emotional condition that affects many mothers after they give birth.​ See the article "Understanding Postpartum Depression, " in the June 8, 2003, issue of this magazine.
Seasonal affective disorder likely occurs as a result of a lack of sunlight during autumn and winter.
It usually clears up during spring and summer.
Depression
What is depression?
"I have become disconcerted, I have bowed low to an extreme degree; all day long I have walked about sad. "
Psalm 38:6.
WHAT RESEARCHERS SAY
Everyone feels down now and then, but clinical depression is a debilitating disorder that is ongoing and that interferes with a person’s daily life.
It should be noted that not all experts agree on what is "normal " sadness and what constitutes a "disorder. "
However, it is safe to say that some people experience profoundly negative emotions, at times accompanied by feelings of worthlessness and inordinate guilt.
The Bible tells of many men and women who experienced negative emotions.
For example, Hannah felt "bitter of soul " a phrase that has been rendered as "brokenhearted " and "deeply distressed. " (1 Samuel 1:10) On one occasion the prophet Elijah was so grief-stricken that he prayed for God to take his life! 1 Kings 19:4.
First-century Christians were instructed to "speak consolingly to the depressed souls. " (1 Thessalonians 5:14) According to one reference work, the term "depressed souls " can refer to those "who are temporarily overwhelmed by the stress of life. "
Clearly, even faithful men and women of the Bible at times felt depressed.
Is depression the sufferer’s fault?
"All creation keeps on groaning together and being in pain together. "
Romans 8:22.
The Bible teaches that illness is a by-product of the rebellion of the first human couple.
For example, Psalm 51:5 states: "With error I was brought forth with birth pains, and in sin my mother conceived me. "
And Romans 5:12 explains that "through one man [the first human, Adam] sin entered into the world and death through sin, and thus death spread to all men because they had all sinned. "
Because we have inherited imperfection from Adam, each of us is susceptible to illness, both physical and emotional.
As a result, says the Bible, "all creation keeps on groaning together and being in pain together. "
(Romans 8:22) However, the Bible also offers a hope that no physician can extend God’s promise of a peaceful new world in which all sicknesses and disorders, including depression, will be gone.
Revelation 21:4.
How can you cope with depression?
"Jehovah is near to those that are broken at heart; and those who are crushed in spirit he saves. "
WHY IT MATTERS
You cannot always control your circumstances, and bad things are bound to affect you at times.
(Ecclesiastes 9:11, 12) You can, however, develop a practical strategy so that negative feelings do not dominate your life.
The Bible acknowledges that those who are sick need a physician.
(Luke 5:31) So if you suffer from a debilitating mood disorder, there is nothing wrong with seeking medical attention.
The Bible also emphasizes the value of prayer.
For example, Psalm 55:22 says: "Throw your burden upon Jehovah himself, and he himself will sustain you.
Never will he allow the righteous one to totter. " Prayer is not a psychological crutch; it is real communication with Jehovah God, who is "near to those that are broken at heart. "
You may also benefit by confiding your feelings to a close friend.
(Proverbs 17:17) "A fellow believer gently coaxed me to talk about my depression, " says Daniela, one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
"Although I had been avoiding such a conversation for years, I soon realized that this was what I needed all along.
I was surprised at how relieved I felt afterward. "
Why Go On?
IF YOU met Diana, you would find her to be an intelligent, friendly, and gregarious young woman.
But beneath Diana’s charming exterior lurks a crippling despair that leaves her feeling utterly worthless for days, weeks, or even months at a time.
"Not a day goes by that I don’t think about dying, " she says.
"I truly believe that the world would be a better place without me. "
"Some studies have shown that for every death by suicide, 200 people have attempted suicide and 400 [other] people have thought about it. "
THE GAZETTE, MONTREAL, CANADA.
Diana says that she would never kill herself.
Still, at times she sees little point in going on with life.
"My greatest wish is to be killed in an accident, " she says.
"I’ve come to view death as a friend not an enemy. "
Many people can relate to Diana’s feelings, and some of them have contemplated or attempted suicide.
Experts point out, however, that most people who try to kill themselves do not really want to end their life; they merely want to end their suffering.
In short, they believe that they have a reason to die; what they need is a reason to live.
Why go on?
Consider three reasons to keep living.
MYTH: Talking about suicide or even using the word encourages people to try it.
FACT: Bringing the topic out into the open often helps a person with suicidal thoughts to consider other options.
When Life Seems Unbearable
LIFE can be pure bliss​ when all goes well.
But what if circumstances make your life seem unbearable?
For instance, Sally, in the United States, who lost most of her possessions in a hurricane, explains: "I didn’t know how much more I could take.
Many days I felt that I was near the breaking point. "
Or what if a loved one dies?
Janice, in Australia, says: "When I lost both my sons, I had to gather the fragments of my shattered life and reassemble them as best I could.
I begged God: ‘Please, my heart can’t take any more!
Just let me sleep.
I don’t want to wake up again.’ "
Daniel, on the other hand, was devastated when his wife was unfaithful.
He explains: "When my wife confessed that she had been unfaithful, it was like a knife pierced my heart.
I felt this physical pain stabbing me again and again​ and it lasted several months. "
This issue of The Watchtower will consider how life can be worth living even when
Disaster strikes
A loved one dies
A spouse is unfaithful
You are dealing with a serious illness
Life becomes unbearable
So, first, how can we cope when disaster strikes?
Teen Depression Why?
What Can Help?
"WHEN I have a bout of depression, " says Anna, "I have no motivation to do anything, not even the things I usually love to do.
All I want to do is sleep.
I often feel that I am unlovable, worthless, and a burden to others. "
"I thought about suicide, " recalls Julia.
"I didn’t really want to die.
I just wanted to stop feeling this way.
I’m normally a caring person, but when I’m depressed, I care little about anyone or anything. "
Anna and Julia were in their early teens when they first experienced depression.
While other young people might occasionally feel down, Anna and Julia had periods of depression that persisted for weeks or months at a time.
"It’s like being stuck in a deep, dark hole with no way out, " Anna says.
"You feel like you are losing your mind, losing who you are. "
Anna and Julia’s situation is not uncommon.
The diagnosis of depression among the young appears to be increasing at an alarming rate, and depression is "the predominant cause of illness and disability for both boys and girls aged 10 to 19 years, " says the World Health Organization (WHO).
The symptoms of depression can appear during adolescence and may include changes in sleep patterns, appetite, and weight.
Feelings of despair, hopelessness, sadness, and worthlessness may also appear.
Other signs include social withdrawal, trouble concentrating or remembering, suicidal thoughts or actions, and medically unexplained symptoms.
When mental-health professionals suspect depression, they usually look for groups of symptoms that persist for weeks and that disrupt a person’s everyday life.
POSSIBLE CAUSES OF TEEN DEPRESSION
According to WHO, "depression results from a complex interaction of social, psychological and biological factors. "
These may include the following.
Physical factors.
As was true in Julia’s case, depression often runs in families, suggesting that genetics can play a role, perhaps affecting chemical activity in the brain.
Other physical risk factors include cardiovascular disease and changing hormone levels, as well as ongoing substance abuse, which may intensify depression, if not give rise to it.
Stress.
While a little stress can be healthy, chronic or excessive stress can be physically and psychologically harmful, sometimes to the point of plunging a susceptible, or biologically vulnerable, teen into depression.
That said, the exact causes of depression remain unclear and may involve a combination of factors, as mentioned earlier.
Stress-related factors linked to depression may include parental divorce or separation, the death of a loved one, physical or sexual abuse, a serious accident, illness, or a learning disability especially if a child feels rejected as a result.
A related factor may be unrealistically high parental expectations, perhaps in regard to scholastic achievement.
Other possible causes are bullying, uncertainty about the future, emotional estrangement by a depressed parent, and parental unpredictability.
If depression results, what may help a teen to cope?
CARE FOR YOUR MIND AND BODY
Moderate to severe depression is usually managed with medication and counseling by a mental-health professional.
Jesus Christ said: "Those who are strong do not need a physician, but those who are ill do. "
(Mark 2:17) And illness can affect any part of our body, including our brain!
Lifestyle changes may also be advisable because our mind and body are closely connected.
If you suffer from depression, take reasonable measures to care for your physical and mental health.
For instance, eat wholesome meals, get sufficient sleep, and exercise regularly.
Exercise releases chemicals that can lift your mood, increase your energy, and improve your sleep.
If possible, try to recognize triggers and early warning signs of a depressive mood and create a suitable plan of action.
Confide in someone you trust.
A supportive network of close family members and friends may help you to cope more effectively with your depression, possibly reducing symptoms.
Record your thoughts and feelings in a journal a practice that helped Julia, quoted earlier.
Above all, be sure to address your spiritual need.
This can greatly improve your outlook on life.
Jesus Christ said: "Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need. "
Matthew 5:3.
A teenage girl has a meal with her parents, exercises, and sleeps
Eat well, stay active, and get sufficient sleep
A teenage girl reads the Bible
You can find comfort by satisfying your spiritual need
Both Anna and Julia attest to Jesus’ words.
Anna says: "Spiritual activities make me focus on other people, not just on my own problems.
That isn’t always easy, but I am much happier as a result. "
Julia finds comfort in prayer and Bible reading.
"Pouring out my heart to God in prayer calms me, " she says.
"And the Bible helps me to see that I am valuable in God’s eyes and that he really cares about me.
Bible reading also gives me a positive view of the future. "
As our Creator, Jehovah God fully understands how our upbringing, experiences in life, and genetic makeup influence our outlook and emotions.
He is therefore able to supply needed support and comfort, perhaps doing so through compassionate and understanding fellow humans.
Moreover, the time will come when God will heal us of all our illnesses, physical or mental.
"No resident will say: ‘I am sick,’ " says Isaiah 33:24.
Yes, the Bible promises that God "will wipe out every tear from [our] eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. "
(Revelation 21:4) How comforting and reassuring that is!
If you would like to learn more about God’s purpose for mankind and the earth, please visit us at jw.org.
There you will find an excellent online Bible, as well as articles on a broad range of topics, including depression.
What Parents Can Do
Recognize that depressed teens may find it hard to express their feelings or may not understand what is happening to them.
They may not even be aware of the symptoms of depression.
Teens tend to express their depression in ways different from those of adults, so be alert to major changes in your child’s behavior, eating habits, moods, sleep patterns, or social interactions especially if the changes persist for weeks.
Take seriously any comments or hints regarding suicide.
If you suspect depression (not just the blues), consider getting a professional diagnosis.
Help your teen adhere to the doctor’s prescribed treatment, and consult the doctor if you see no improvement or observe unpleasant side effects.
Have a stable family routine for eating, exercising, and sleeping.
Maintain good communication with your teen, and help him or her to deal with any stigma associated with depression.
Because depression can make one feel alone, ashamed, or worthless, regularly reassure your teen of your love.
Create a "First-Aid Kit " for Your Emotions
An emotional first-aid kit, including positive and upbuilding momentos, scriptures, songs, articles, and experiences
If you suffer from depression, a practical suggestion to help you control your thoughts and feelings is to create what has been called an emotional first-aid kit.
The kit, which can be adjusted as you see fit, might include the items on this page.
Contact information of people to call when you feel down
Favorite songs that are positive and upbuilding
Inspirational sayings and encouraging articles
A list of comforting and upbuilding sayings from the Bible, such as Psalm 34:18; 51:17; 94:19; Philippians 4:6, 7
Mementos to remind you of people who love you
A journal containing your positive thoughts as well as positive experiences you have enjoyed
Depression and Teenage Girls
The incidence of depression in teenage girls appears to be higher than that of boys.
One factor may be the stress resulting from emotional, physical, or sexual harassment or abuse, which girls often have to cope with.
"When a scary external world and a chaotic internal world collide, " wrote professional counselor Sharon Hersh, "the result is often overwhelming and confusing. "
Girls may also be unduly influenced by media portrayals of the "ideal " body.
A girl who sees herself as physically undesirable or who is overly concerned about peer approval may be more vulnerable to depression.
How Can I Stop Being So Sad?
"When everyone else falls apart, I’m there to fix their problems and make them feel better.
But then​ and this is the part that few people see I go home to my room and cry. "​ Kellie.
"When I’m down, I isolate myself.
If I get invited somewhere, I come up with an excuse not to go.
I do a good job at hiding my sadness from my family.
They think I’m fine. "​ Rick.
Have your thoughts ever been similar to those of Kellie or Rick?
If so, don’t hastily conclude that there’s something wrong with you.
The fact is, everyone gets sad now and then.
Even faithful men and women mentioned in the Bible did.​ 1 Samuel 1:​6-8; Psalm 35:14.
In some cases, you may know why you are sad; in other cases, you may not.
"You don’t have to be in a horrible situation to feel sad, " says 19-year-old Anna.
"It can come on at any time, even if your life is trouble free.
It’s weird, but it happens! "
Regardless of the cause​ or even if there doesn’t seem to be one what can you do when sadness holds you in its grip?
Try the following:
Talk about it.
In the midst of his turmoil, Job said: "I will speak in the bitterness of my soul! "​ Job 10:1.
Kellie: The relief I feel after talking to someone is amazing.
Finally, someone knows what I’m going through.
They can lower the rope and pull me out of the pit​ saved at last!
Write about it.
When sadness clouds your outlook on life, you might want to try putting your thoughts on paper.
In his inspired psalms, David sometimes expressed deep sadness.
(Psalm 6:6) Writing about such feelings can help you to "safeguard practical wisdom and thinking ability. "​ Proverbs 3:​21.
Heather: Writing helps me to organize the mental clutter that accumulates from sadness.
When you can express your feelings and sort them out, the sadness is less overwhelming.
Pray about it.
The Bible says that if you pray about your concerns, ‘the peace of God that excels all thought will guard your heart and your mental powers.’​ Philippians 4:​6, 7.
Esther: I was trying to figure out why I felt so down, and I couldn’t.
I asked Jehovah to help me to be happy.
I was sick of being sad when I had no reason to be.
I finally broke the cycle.
Never underestimate the power of prayer!
With assistance and effort, you can get out of a deep pit of sadness
Suggestion: Use Psalm 139:23, 24 as a pattern for your own prayer to Jehovah.
Pour out your heart, and ask him to help you identify the root of your sadness.
In addition to the suggestions mentioned earlier, you have a valuable resource in God’s Word, the Bible.
Filling your mind with upbuilding thoughts that can be gleaned from Bible accounts can have a positive effect on your feelings.​ Psalm 1:​1-3.
When sadness won’t go away
"On some mornings, " says Ryan, "I feel that it would be easier just to stay in bed and avoid having to get up and face another pointless day. "
Ryan suffers from clinical depression, and he’s not alone.
Studies suggest that about 1 in 4 youths suffers from some type of major or minor depression before reaching adulthood.
How can you find out if you suffer from depression?
Some symptoms include a pronounced change in mood and behavior, social isolation, diminished interest in almost all activities, a significant change in eating habits and sleeping patterns, and intense feelings of worthlessness or unwarranted guilt.
Of course, nearly everyone has one or more of those symptoms at some time or another.
But if symptoms persist for more than a couple of weeks, why not talk to your parents about getting a checkup?
A physician can help determine if your sadness has a medical cause.
If you do suffer from clinical depression, it is nothing to be ashamed of.
With treatment, many sufferers have begun to feel better​ perhaps the best they have felt in a long time.
Whether your sadness is caused by depression or not, remember the comforting words of Psalm 34:18: "Jehovah is near to those that are broken at heart; and those who are crushed in spirit he saves. "
Why Do I Cut Myself?
What is cutting?
Why do people do it?
If you have this problem, how can you stop?
Interview
Questions for reflection
My scripture journal
What is cutting?
Cutting is the practice of compulsively harming oneself with a sharp object.
It’s just one form of self-injury.
Others include burning, bruising, or hitting oneself.
This article is about cutting, but the principles discussed apply to all forms of self-injury.
Test your knowledge: True or False.
Only girls cut themselves.
Cutting violates the Bible command at Leviticus 19:28, which says: "You must not make cuts in your flesh. "
Correct answers:
False.
While the problem seems more prevalent among girls, some boys cut themselves and engage in other forms of self-injury too.
Leviticus 19:28 refers to an ancient pagan ritual, not to the compulsive practice of self-injury discussed in this article.
Nevertheless, it stands to reason that our loving Creator doesn’t want us to harm ourselves.​ 1 Corinthians 6:​12; 2 Corinthians 7:1; 1 John 4:8.
Test your knowledge: Which statement do you think is most accurate?
People cut themselves . . .
because they are trying to cope with emotional anguish.
because they are trying to kill themselves.
Correct answer: A. Most people who cut themselves don’t want to die.
They just want to end their emotional despair.
Note what some young people have said about their practice of cutting.
Celia: "It brought me a sense of relief. "
Tamara: "It seemed to provide an escape.
The physical pain was better than the emotional pain. "
Carrie: "I hated feeling sad.
Cutting took the focus off my sadness and put it onto my physical pain. "
Jerrine: "Every time I cut myself, I became almost unaware of my surroundings, and I wouldn’t have to deal with my problems.
I welcomed the change. "
If you have this problem, how can you stop?
Prayer to Jehovah God can be a vital step to recovery.
The Bible says: "Throw all your anxiety upon him, because he cares for you. "​ 1 Peter 5:7.
Suggestion: Start with brief prayers, perhaps simply telling Jehovah, "I need help. "
In time, you will be able to open up and pour out your feelings to "the God of all comfort. "​ 2 Corinthians 1:​3, 4.
Prayer is not some psychological crutch.
It is real communication with your heavenly Father, who promises: "I will really help you.
I will really keep fast hold of you with my right hand of righteousness. "​ Isaiah 41:10.
Many who have struggled with cutting have also found comfort in talking to a parent or another trusted adult.
Consider the following comments from three young people who did just that.
Diana, 21
Kathy, 15
Lorena, 17
How old were you when you started cutting yourself?
Lorena: I started when I was about 14.
Diana: I was 18, and the frequency varied.
I would cut every day for a week or two and then go for a month without doing it at all.
Kathy: I started when I was 14.
I still have occasional setbacks.
Why did you want to hurt yourself?
Kathy: I struggled with feelings of self-hatred.
I felt as if no one could possibly want me as a friend.
Diana: Sometimes my sadness would turn into frustration, and my frustration into despair.
The despair would grow until it became overwhelming.
It was like a huge beast inside me, and it was as if I had to cut myself to let it out.
Lorena: I would get really depressed or angry or just feel down about myself.
I would feel like dirt, and I wanted to get rid of all that horrible emotional junk.
Sometimes I would feel like I deserved the physical pain.
Did hurting yourself make you feel better?
Diana: It did.
I felt lighter afterward, as if a burden had been lifted from me.
Kathy: It’s almost like a form of crying.
I felt better after I cut myself the same way that some people feel better after a good cry.
Lorena: Self-injury was like puncturing a small hole in the balloon of negative emotions inside me.
It wouldn’t pop; it would just leak and let all the negativity out slowly.
Were you afraid to tell anyone what you were doing?
Lorena: Yes.
I was afraid people would think I was weird.
Plus I didn’t want others to know about my personal life.
Diana: People always told me that they thought I was strong, and I wanted them to keep believing that.
I felt that asking for help would have been a defeat.
Kathy: I was afraid that people would think I was messed up, which in turn would make me feel even worse about myself.
Besides, I felt that I deserved what I was doing to myself.
What was a turning point for you?
Lorena: I told my mom what I had been doing.
I also got help from a doctor, who helped me control my negative emotions.
I had a few setbacks, but improving my Bible study routine helped.
I also stay active in the Christian ministry.
Perhaps I will always struggle with occasional feelings of worthlessness, but when they arise, I try not to let them rule me.
Kathy: A Christian sister who is about ten years older than I am could tell something was wrong, and I eventually confided in her.
To my surprise, she too had once struggled with cutting.
I didn’t feel awkward talking to her because she had been through it herself.
I also got help from a doctor, who helped me and my parents to understand what I was going through.
Diana: One night I was at the home of a couple whom I trusted, and the husband noticed that something wasn’t right.
He kindly urged me to tell them what was wrong.
His wife held me and rocked me in her arms just the way my mom used to when I was a little girl.
I started to cry, and so did she.
It was hard to tell them what I had been doing to myself, but I’m glad that I did.
How has the Bible helped you?
Diana: The Bible has helped me to realize that I can’t fight this on my own.
I need Jehovah God’s help.​ Proverbs 3:​5, 6.
Kathy: Reading the Bible​ and knowing that its message comes from God​ gives me such deep comfort!​ 2 Timothy 3:​16.
Lorena: When I come across scriptures that touch me, I write them in a notebook so I can reflect on them later.​ 1 Timothy 4:​15.
Is there a scripture in particular that touched you?
Diana: Proverbs 18:1 says: "One isolating himself will seek his own selfish longing; against all practical wisdom he will break forth. "
Sometimes I find it difficult to be around people, but this scripture helps me to realize that to isolate myself is dangerous.
Kathy: Two Bible verses that I love are Matthew 10:29 and 31, where Jesus said that not even a sparrow dies without Jehovah God noticing it.
And then he added: "Have no fear: you are worth more than many sparrows. "
Even now, reading those words reminds me that I’m valuable to Jehovah.
Lorena: I appreciate the passage at Isaiah 41:​9, 10, where Jehovah says to his people: "I have not rejected you.
Do not be afraid, for I am with you. . . . I will fortify you. "
When I think of something that is fortified, I think of something impenetrable, a structure with stone walls.
This scripture makes me feel empowered, knowing that Jehovah loves me and that I will have him by my side always.
When you are ready to reach out for help, in whom could you confide?
What can you say in prayer to Jehovah God about the matter?
Can you name two methods (that do not involve self-injury) that you can use to release your stress and anxiety?
Suggestion: When you come across a Bible passage that assures you of Jehovah’s love or that can help you to develop a balanced view of yourself and your failings, write that scripture in a journal.
Include a sentence or two about why the passage is meaningful to you.
To help you get started, here are some scriptures that Diana, Kathy, and Lorena found helpful.
Romans 8:​38, 39
"These verses show me that Jehovah loves me, even when I feel that things couldn’t get any worse. "​ Diana.
Psalm 73:23
"Scriptures like this one assure me that I’m not alone.
It’s as if Jehovah is right here next to me. "​ Kathy.
1 Peter 5:​10
"Relief may not come immediately; we may have to suffer ‘a little while.’
In the end, though, Jehovah can make us strong enough to endure anything. "​ Lorena.
More scriptures to consider
Psalm 34:18
Psalm 54:4
Psalm 55:22
Isaiah 57:15
Matthew 11:28, 29
Can the Bible Help Me if I’m Depressed?
Yes, because the best help comes from "God, Who comforts and encourages and refreshes and cheers the depressed. "​ 2 Corinthians 7:6, The Amplified Bible.
What God gives to help the depressed
Strength.
God "refreshes and cheers " you, not by removing all your problems, but by answering your prayers when you pray for the strength to cope.
(Philippians 4:13) You can be sure that he’s ready to listen to you, for the Bible says: "Jehovah is near to those that are broken at heart; and those who are crushed in spirit he saves. "
(Psalm 34:18) In fact, God can hear your call for help even if you can’t put your feelings into words.​ Romans 8:26, 27.
Good examples.
One Bible writer prayed to God: "From the depths of my despair I call to you. "
This psalmist dealt with his depression by remembering that God doesn’t burden us with guilt.
Instead, he said to God: "If you kept a record of our sins, who could escape being condemned?
But you forgive us, so that we should stand in awe of you. "​ Psalm 130:1, 3, 4, Good News Translation.
Hope.
Besides providing comfort now, God has promised to remove all the problems that lead to depression.
When he fulfills that promise, "the former things [including depression] will not be called to mind, neither will they come up into the heart. "​ Isaiah 65:17.
Note: While acknowledging the help that God provides, Jehovah’s Witnesses also seek medical treatment for ailments such as clinical depression.
(Mark 2:17) We do not, however, endorse any specific medical treatment; we feel that each person should make his own decision on such matters.
Democratic Republic of Congo Prohibits Religious Discrimination in Schools
"Fighting against discrimination and inequalities is a fundamental [priority] of the National Education. " Secretary Offices of the Ministry of Education, June 12, 2014.
For several years, Witness children in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) were expelled from schools sponsored by other religious organizations because they would not participate in religious programs.
This became an issue because the schools had placed their internal rules above government regulations and ignored the rights of Witness students.
The Congolese authorities saw the injustice and affirmed the right for all to receive an education free from discrimination.
Church-Sponsored Schools Follow Internal Rules Instead of Government Regulations
Religious organizations have entered into agreements with the Congolese government to sponsor public schools in areas where there is a need.
The agreements clearly state that "children are to be protected from practices that promote religious discrimination and intolerance. "
The church-sponsored schools, however, have often had internal rules requiring students to attend and participate in religious programs.
A number of these schools have insisted on enforcing their internal rules, disregarding both their agreement with the government and the students’ right to freedom of worship.
The problem became apparent in 2005, when 52 Witness students were expelled from a church-sponsored school in Abumombazi, Equateur Province, because they requested exemption from church services organized by school authorities.
The problem escalated as church-sponsored schools in other provinces followed suit.
In time, more than 300 Congolese Witness students from all grades were expelled, including those nearing graduation.
After being unjustly expelled from school in 2009, 13-year-old Kanyere Ndavaro wrote: "I am very sad about this damage to my life.
I do not know what my future will be. "
Kambere Mafika Justin, expelled shortly before his graduation in 2010, said that his life had been "turned upside down. "
Although the students were upset at being denied an education or a diploma, they refused to compromise their religious beliefs.
Congolese Officials Uphold Religious Freedom
Parents of the expelled children spoke with school administrators in an effort to resolve the problem but met with limited success.
Consequently, the Witnesses pursued the matter with governmental authorities and found fair-minded officials who worked to put a stop to the religious discrimination.
In 2011, Mme. Bazizane Maheshe, the Minister of Education for North Kivu Province, published a provincial circular entitled "Ban Placed on Discrimination Based on Religion, " which described the situation as "deplorable. "
The circular addressed the issue clearly by stating: "Students of some religious confessions are subject to discrimination based on internal school rules in disregard of regulations in force in the DR Congo. "
The issue received national attention on September 4, 2013, when Mwangu Famba, the Minister of Education for the Democratic Republic of Congo, published a decree applying to all schools in all districts.
The "Circular on the Prohibition of Discrimination Based on Religion " unequivocally stated: "All children have the right to apply to any school without adverse distinction based on religion. "
The decree also stated that expulsion of students on religious grounds was "in total violation of the standards and laws in force in the Democratic Republic of Congo. "
Many schools have obeyed the official directives and have welcomed Witness students back into the classroom.
A few schools, however, have resisted.
Thus, on June 12, 2014, the Ministry of Education published a memorandum reinforcing the September 2013 decree and citing the new framework law on education that was issued by the President of the DRC.
This reminder addressed the root cause of the problem by highlighting the importance of fighting discrimination and stressed the primacy of national and international laws over internal school rules.
The Minister of Education also appointed investigators to visit schools throughout the country to ensure that they abide by the decree.
No doubt, these measures taken by the government will bring long-standing, positive results.
Benefits to Many
As Congolese schools act in accordance with the law, all students can expect to receive an education unencumbered by religious intolerance.
School children will learn to accord respect to all people, regardless of their beliefs.
In so doing, Congolese schools will not only uphold the Constitution of the DRC and the decree from the Minister of Education but also set an example of fairness for its young people.
Twenty Years of Imprisonment in Eritrea​ Will It Ever End?
Twenty years ago, Eritrean authorities arrested three young men and detained them in harsh conditions in the Sawa prison camp, where they remain until this day.
They have never been charged with a crime, nor have they been given the opportunity to defend themselves in a court of law.
Why have they been unjustly imprisoned?
Paulos Eyasu, Negede Teklemariam, and Isaac Mogos are Jehovah’s Witnesses and conscientiously object to performing military service because of their strongly held religious beliefs.
Had they been formally charged with the "crime " of refusing military service, they would have been sentenced to a fixed prison term.
Paulos, Negede, and Isaac, now aged 41, 40, and 38 respectively, have spent their youth in confinement.
They have been denied the opportunity to marry and have children, give support to their aging parents, or live their lives as they choose.
They have also been denied the opportunity to worship with their fellow believers.
After their arrest on September 24, 1994, Paulos, Negede, and Isaac were treated severely, even tortured, by authorities in the Sawa prison camp.
In recent years, however, the harsh treatment has ended, and their firm determination to remain loyal to their religious beliefs has earned them the respect of the prison guards.
Other Witnesses imprisoned in harsh conditions
It is in Eritrea, more than anywhere else in the world, that Jehovah’s Witnesses experience the most intense persecution.
As of this writing, 73 Witnesses are in prison, including women, children, and the elderly.
Many have endured under harsh desert conditions, lacking a balanced diet and sufficient water and being mistreated by prison officials.
Three other Witness men have been imprisoned for more than ten years in the Sawa camp, but Paulos, Negede, and Isaac have been in detention the longest of any other Witnesses in Eritrea.
International community calls on Eritrea to end religious persecution
The international community is well-aware of Eritrea’s mistreatment of Jehovah’s Witnesses and other religious minorities.
Every year since 2004, the U.S. Department of State has designated Eritrea as a "country of particular concern, " which refers to "any country whose government engages in or tolerates particularly severe violations of religious freedom that are systematic, ongoing and egregious. "
The United Nations Human Rights Council has expressed deep concern at the "grave violations of human rights by the Eritrean authorities against their own population and fellow citizens. "
It calls upon the Eritrean government "to respect everyone’s right to freedom . . . of thought, conscience and religion or belief. "
The U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom stated in its Annual Report for 2014: "The religious freedom situation is particularly grave for . . . Jehovah’s Witnesses. "
In its World Report 2013, Human Rights Watch acknowledged that the Eritrean government continues to arrest, detain, and torture members of "unrecognized " religions and that "Jehovah’s Witnesses are especially victimized. "
In December 2005 the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights adopted Resolution on the Human Rights Situation in Eritrea, which called on Eritrea to "guarantee, at all times, the right to a fair trial, freedom of opinion and expression as well as the right to peaceful assembly. "
Philip Brumley, general counsel for Jehovah’s Witnesses, spoke for Witnesses worldwide when he said: "It is our fervent hope that the government of Eritrea will release all Witness prisoners, including these three men who have been detained for 20 years, and bring an end to the persecution of our fellow believers. "
Jehovah’s Witnesses Complete Peak Construction Phase of New World Headquarters
NEW YORK From August to October 2015, the building of Jehovah’s Witnesses’ new world headquarters in Warwick, New York, was at peak construction, with 3,800 volunteer workers assisting with the project each day.
During peak construction, approximately 40 buses were used to help transport some 3,800 volunteers to and from the site each day.
As many as eight temporary dining rooms have been used to provide meals for the volunteers.
Since breaking ground in July 2013, over 18,000 Witnesses have traveled from every state including Alaska and Hawaii to work on the project.
Approximately 400-500 workers arrive each weekend, although this jumped to well over 700 during the peak phase. A large part of the workforce has volunteered for assignments lasting from one to four weeks.
Richard Devine, chairman of the Witnesses’ Warwick Construction Project Committee (CPC), explains: "With thousands of people on the job each day, worksites could easily get overcrowded.
To keep things organized and efficient, we took about 400 from the day shift and assigned them to work from 3 p.m. to 2 a.m. "
That second shift lasted from May through September.
A view at sunset of what will be the main entrance to the Witnesses’ new world headquarters complex.
The CPC reports that two of the four residence buildings will be completed by January 2016, as originally planned.
However, according to Mr. Devine, "the overall project is four months ahead of schedule thanks to what has been a huge coordinated effort. "
The remaining residence, office, and maintenance buildings are now scheduled for completion by September 1, 2016.
Aerial view of the new world headquarters site.
Contact(s):
Witnesses Begin Highly Anticipated Sale of Brooklyn Properties
NEW YORK Jehovah’s Witnesses are selling some of the most sought-after properties in Dumbo and Brooklyn Heights in Brooklyn, New York.
The competitive offering process has begun for 85 Jay Street, one of Brooklyn’s largest undeveloped sites, and the ten-story residence at 124 Columbia Heights.
The current location of their world headquarters, 25/30 Columbia Heights, is also on the market.
The three properties are being offered by the Watchtower Real Estate Office and are expected to sell in separate transactions.
Richard Devine, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses, states concerning the 135,000-square-foot (12,542 sq m) parcel at 85 Jay Street: "The site spans an entire city block in the dynamic Dumbo neighborhood and has nearly one million square feet of development rights. "
The 85 Jay Street property sits at the base of the Manhattan Bridge in the vibrant Dumbo neighborhood.
The Witnesses’ 152,000-square-foot (14,121 sq m) residential building at 124 Columbia Heights is located on the promenade in the acclaimed Brooklyn Heights Historic District.
"It’s a remarkable building with spectacular views of the Brooklyn Bridge, the Statue of Liberty, and the impressive Lower Manhattan skyline, " states Mr. Devine.
124 Columbia Heights is located in the historic Brooklyn Heights neighborhood.
The world headquarters of Jehovah’s Witnesses has been located at 25/30 Columbia Heights (top image) for decades and is familiar to many New Yorkers for its marquee Watchtower sign and clock.
The property, totaling over 733,000 square feet (68,098 sq m), covers almost two city blocks and offers unobstructed views of the Brooklyn Bridge.
Commenting on the larger scope of the Witnesses’ plans, Mr. Devine adds, "These sales are the next steps in relocating our world headquarters to Warwick, New York. "
For further details on the properties, please see the website www.WatchtowerBrooklynRealEstate.com.
Interviews and photographs are available upon request from the Office of Public Information.
Witnesses Awarded for Bible Education Work in Mexico Prisons
MEXICO CITY Officials from the state of Baja California, Mexico, presented Jehovah’s Witnesses with a certificate of appreciation for their Bible education work in state penitentiaries.
The document was signed by state secretary of public security, Daniel De La Rosa Anaya, and by secretary of the state penitentiary system, Jesús Héctor Grijalva Tapia.
The certificate reads: "The state government, through the secretary of public security, grants appreciation to Jehovah’s Witnesses for their invaluable support, dedication, work, and commitment to the Baja California community; contributing to the enhancement of the quality of life and thereby strengthening social reintegration. "
Director of the Social Rehabilitation Center in Mexicali, Jesús Manuel López Moreno.
Jehovah’s Witnesses regularly visit several penitentiaries in Baja California, including one in Mexicali, which they began visiting in 1991 after receiving an inquiry from an inmate.
In an interview with the Witnesses, director of the Social Rehabilitation Center in Mexicali, Jesús Manuel López Moreno, stated: "Your coming here and caring for those [inmates] supports us in giving them the strength to say: ‘We are human beings.
We have value because, when the time comes, we are going to reintegrate ourselves into society and we must be productive in it.’ . . .
I am infinitely grateful for your support. "
Gamaliel Camarillo, spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Mexico, says: "The primary work of Jehovah’s Witnesses is to help people, including prisoners, understand what the Bible teaches.
A local congregation in Mexicali reports that at least eight individuals have been baptized as Jehovah’s Witnesses while serving their sentences in the Mexicali penitentiary.
We believe that people of all backgrounds should be given the opportunity to benefit from Bible education.
Witnesses in Ghana Immediately Respond After Flooding
ACCRA, Ghana At the end of August 2015, Jehovah’s Witnesses completed their relief efforts in Ghana’s capital, Accra, where severe flooding devastated property and killed more than 200 people.
Local Witnesses point to the waterline on the house of a displaced fellow worshipper.
While no Witnesses lost their lives, some 250 were displaced by the floods.
On June 4, 2015, the day after the flooding, the branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Ghana set up a disaster relief committee, which focused on caring for individuals’ immediate needs by providing blankets, clothing, and water.
The relief committee also arranged to clean and repair flooded residences.
Witnesses in the Accra area assisted by opening their homes temporarily to accommodate displaced fellow believers.
Disaster relief committee chairman, Dossou Amevor (far left) supervises the distribution of mattresses at the Atiman Kingdom Hall in Madina, Accra.
Flooding caused an explosion at a petrol station that damaged pipes in Adabraka, cutting off the area’s water supply.
The branch office set up a water tank at the Adabraka Kingdom Hall (a place of worship) for the Witnesses and their neighbors.
On Saturday, June 6, the branch office dispatched two medical teams, a total of five Witness doctors and two nurses, to care for their fellow worshippers and other victims in Alajo and Adabraka.
They treated a variety of health issues, such as malaria, chest infections, and diarrhea.
Representatives of the branch office and local Witnesses also visited their fellow worshippers to provide spiritual and emotional comfort.
Three Witness doctors and two nurses pictured inside the Adabraka Kingdom Hall, which was used as a treatment facility.
Spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Ghana, Nathaniel Gbedemah, comments: "We are pained by the destruction and loss of life caused by the flooding in Accra.
As Jehovah’s Witnesses have done in other parts of the world, we are doing all we can to respond to the emotional, physical, and spiritual needs of those in our community affected by this disaster. "
Experts Object to Russia’s Banning of JW.ORG
ST.
PETERSBURG, Russia On July 21, 2015, the Russian Federation banned jw.org, the official website of Jehovah’s Witnesses, making it a criminal offense to promote it from within the federation.
Russia is the only country in the world to ban jw.org.
Religious studies specialist and professor at the Academy of Labor and Social Relations in Moscow, Yekaterina Elbakyan, comments on jw.org: "I think the website is necessary because it contains objective information directly from Jehovah’s Witnesses about their organization rather than third-party opinions. . . .
Not only are its members interested in the website, but also those who are simply interested in various religions.
And I’m not only speaking about professional religious scholars like myself but also journalists and publicists who write about religion. "
"I think the website is necessary because it contains objective information directly from Jehovah’s Witnesses " Yekaterina Elbakyan, Professor, Academy of Labor and Social Relations, Moscow
A legal expert at the Human Rights Institute in Moscow, Lev Levinson, puts this action by the government in historical context: "Twenty-first century Russia has a constitution that guarantees freedom of religion and equality of religious associations before the law.
However, as in the 19th century, Russia is again restricting the freedom of sharing one’s religious views by confiscating literature and banning websites.
And this is all being done by judges and experts who apply unlawful regulations under the guise of counteracting extremism. "
The ban is the latest development in a legal battle stretching back to 2013.
On August 7 of that year, a Russian district court declared the website "extremist " during a secret trial, but that decision was reversed by a regional court on January 22, 2014.
However, a Deputy of the Prosecutor General of the Russian Federation appealed to the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation to reinstate the trial decision.
On December 2, 2014, the Supreme Court heard the prosecution’s appeal without the Witnesses present to defend themselves, as they were not properly notified of the hearing.
The Supreme Court reinstated the trial decision, declaring the entire website "extremist " although the court conceded that the website no longer contained any religious material prohibited by the Russian authorities.
The Witnesses contested the decision and appealed to the chairman of the Supreme Court, but without success.
As a result of that decision, on July 21, 2015, the Ministry of Justice of the Russian Federation added the website to the Federal List of Extremist Materials, banning the website throughout Russia.
Yaroslav Sivulskiy, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Russia, comments on the impact of the ban: "We are disappointed that the Russian authorities have taken this unwarranted action.
This ban curtails the worship of over 170,000 in this country who are Jehovah’s Witnesses.
But when you consider that some 285,000 people in Russia accessed the website every day, it is clear that even those who are not members of our faith have been deprived of an excellent resource for Bible study. "
Speaking from the Witnesses’ world headquarters in Brooklyn, New York, J. R. Brown, an international spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses, states: "Our official website, jw.org, hosts award-winning videos, publications for Bible study in hundreds of languages, and the two most widely distributed magazines in the world, The Watchtower and Awake!
It has been featured in some of the largest international book fairs and has even been used extensively in schools.
It has benefited many communities around the world and was widely used in Russia.
Really, this is a website that should be promoted. "
Plaque Unveiled for Austrian Witness Executed by Nazis, District Mayor Key Speaker
Gabriele Votava, mayor of Vienna’s Meidling District, delivering the unveiling speech.
VIENNA On May 13, 2015, some 400 attended the unveiling of a plaque dedicated to Gerhard Steinacher, one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, who was executed 75 years ago by the Nazis for refusing to join the German army.
The mayor of Vienna’s Meidling District, Gabriele Votava, was the key speaker at the curbside unveiling of the plaque affixed to the outside of the Steinacher family’s former residence in Meidling, Vienna at Lägenfeldgasse 68.
The program bore the theme "I just can’t shoot, " the explanation Mr. Steinacher uttered during his petition for clemency.
Those simple words speak volumes about the Christian values Mr. Steinacher held dear, such as Jesus’ words found at Matthew 19:19: "You must love your neighbor as yourself. "
As a youth, Gerhard was a student of the Bible.
When he was 17, he decided to become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
On September 15, 1939, Mr. Steinacher was arrested for conscientiously objecting to military service and for refusing to swear the oath of loyalty to Hitler.
After being imprisoned in Vienna for six weeks, Mr. Steinacher was transferred to pretrial detention at the Moabit prison in Berlin, Germany.
On November 11, 1939, the first day of his first hearing, Mr. Steinacher was charged with subverting the war effort and sentenced to death row.
He petitioned for clemency based on his religious beliefs.
However, on March 2, 1940, the Reichskriegsgericht (Reich Military Court) upheld the death sentence.
Four weeks later, on March 30, Mr. Steinacher was executed by guillotine at Berlin’s notorious Plötzensee prison.
He was 19 years old.
Following the plaque unveiling ceremony, the event continued at the nearby Volkshochschule Theater.
Among the events scheduled was an exhibit that chronicled the Steinacher’s family history.
One of the displays featured a small box found in 1976 containing 28 letters from Ignatz and Luise Steinacher written to their son Gerhard while he was in prison as well as 25 postcards and letters that Gerhard wrote to comfort his parents and express his conviction in their shared faith.
When Gerhard’s mother, Luise, died in 1976, this box of letters and postcards was found at the Steinacher home.
Reporting on the event, an article in Wiener Bezirkszeitung, a weekly Vienna newspaper, describes it as a "remarkable memorial " that brought Mr. Steinacher’s courageous actions "out of the shadows and into the light. "
The article further extols Mr. Steinacher by stating: "He was prepared to die for his principles the very principles that he lived for. "
Just hours before his execution, Gerhard Steinacher wrote this farewell letter to his parents (translation below).
Three lines were censored by the Nazis.
Dear Mother and Father,
Well, there is no point in saying much.
I was informed two hours ago, at 7:00 p.m., that I’m to be executed tomorrow at 5:50 a.m.
The moment has arrived, Lord give me strength, yes, the spirit is willing but the flesh is weak.
I am sitting here in a cell, it’s about 1:00 a.m., two other men are in here with me, time is rushing by, I am writing this letter in stages as things come to mind.
It’s cold outside, snowing again.
May the Lord give you strength.
I want to work and I’ve promised both orally and in writing that I will work ambitiously and be completely content.
However, I just can’t shoot and everything revolves around this one point.
Now, let the Lord’s will take place; what is to happen cannot be stopped.
Be strong, do not let this weaken you, but let it bring you closer together, do not give up.
I am still a child and I can only stand if the Lord grants me the strength, and I ask him to.
I received your last letter marked March 25.
The 25th, the last greetings from you.
Now it’s around 3:30 a.m.
I never thought this would all happen so fast.
[Three lines have been censored by the Nazis] . . . surprise and so you never know what will happen from one minute to the next.
You will get my belongings.
Pens, papers and letters, money and clothing, key, and some other things.
Please give my warmest greetings to my grandparents, Resi, Uncle, Aunt, Grandma and Grandpa, Mr. and Mrs. Hock.
To all my workmates, everyone who knows me and all my relatives.
Father, be strong, do not give up, do not fall apart, but be strong in your faith as in everything else.
And you, Mother, be strong and firm and support one another.
Beg the Lord that he protects you, gives you power and hope and directs everything so that you stay on the right path and that nothing happens to you.
I will also ask him on your behalf.
As the hour draws closer, I really realize how weak we are.
Up to this point, I have always had the chance to change my mind.
I want to work, but I just can’t shoot.
So now I will finish.
I greet and kiss you, dear Father and Mother, I will always be your Gerhard, 100,000 times over, who longed to be with you.
Until we see each other again in the Kingdom, where all four of us will be together again.
Be of good cheer.
A million kisses.
Officials in Remote Northern Canada Thank Jehovah’s Witnesses for Special Bible Education Campaign
TORONTO About 150 Jehovah’s Witnesses participated in a special Bible education campaign, organized by the branch office of the Witnesses in Canada, in September and October of 2014.
Arrangements were made to visit 35 remote communities throughout the country.
Over 32,000 persons live in these 35 Inuit communities visited by the Witnesses, shown by the yellow markers.
The campaign stretched over two territories and one province, shown in green.
The Witnesses were organized into groups and assigned to visit towns and villages that extended from Aklavik, Northwest Territories, in the west to Kangiqsualujjuaq, Quebec, in the east, a region spanning over 3,300 kilometers (2,000 miles).
Those participating in this outreach campaign cared for their own travel expenses including, in some cases, airline tickets that cost several thousands of dollars per person.
One of the towns reached by the Witnesses was Paulatuk.
It has a population of about 300 and is located on the shore of the Beaufort Sea in the northern region of the Northwest Territories.
Prior to the campaign, the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses approved translation of the video Why Study the Bible? into Inuktitut.
This Inuit language is spoken by about 35,000 people in Canada and is recognized as an official language in Nunavut and the Northwest Territories.
Ms. Velma Illasiak, a school principal in Aklavik, commented about the visit of the Witnesses: "The students really enjoyed the materials that you presented and are thinking about [them] . . .
We are considering ordering a copy of both volumes of the book Questions Young People Ask Answers That Work for each teenager in the school . . .
Thank you for your time at our school and in our community. "
After speaking with the Witnesses and watching the video Why Study the Bible?, Mr. Peter Iyaituk, the mayor of the northern Quebec town of Ivujivik, spent two hours touring the visitors around the community in his vehicle.
He also drove them to the airport on the day of their departure and thanked them for their visit.
David Creamore, one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, shows the video Why Study the Bible? to Mr. Peter Iyaituk, the mayor of Ivujivik.
Matthieu Rozon, spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Canada, states: "Jehovah’s Witnesses are happy to offer free Bible education to everyone.
Those who participated in this campaign felt it was well worth their time and effort. "
During the two-month expedition, the Witnesses distributed over 37,000 pieces of literature.
Almost 600 individuals requested follow-up visits from the Witnesses to continue their Bible discussions.
Witnesses in Zimbabwe Host 2015 "Imitate Jesus! "
Conventions One Year After Historic International Gathering
HARARE, Zimbabwe Jehovah’s Witnesses in Zimbabwe launched the 2015 "Imitate Jesus! "
Regional Conventions on Friday, July 31.
These three-day events are scheduled over 12 consecutive weeks through mid-October.
Geoffrey Jackson, a member of the Governing Body, giving a Bible discourse during the 2014 international convention in Zimbabwe.
He is flanked by two local Witnesses providing simultaneous translation.
"Expectations are high for this year’s convention, " states John Hunguka, spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Zimbabwe, "largely due to the resounding success of our 2014 international convention in Harare, which was a milestone in the history of Jehovah’s Witnesses in this country. "
NewsDay, one of the top newspapers in Zimbabwe, reported that the international convention was "the biggest ever religious gathering " in the country and placed Jehovah’s Witnesses among "the leading newsmakers who kept the nation talking " in 2014.
Over 82,000 filled the National Sports Stadium in Harare for the final day of the 2014 event.
In a post-convention interview, John Jubber, a representative of the Witnesses’ branch office in Zimbabwe, commented: "We had 3,500 delegates from Brazil, Germany, United States, Zambia, and Kenya. "
This year, the Witnesses in Zimbabwe are hosting 39 "Imitate Jesus! "
Regional Conventions in several locations, including the Zimbabwe International Trade Fair Grounds.
The program will be presented in whole or in part in Chinese (Mandarin), Chitonga (Zimbabwe), English, Ndebele (Zimbabwe), Shona, Swahili, and Zimbabwe Sign Language.
The exact dates and locations for conventions in Zimbabwe can be found on the Witnesses’ official website, jw.org.
Officials Honor Father and Son for Helping to Rescue Three Men From Burning Car
Jorim, Christiane, and Andreas Bonk.
Andreas was hospitalized in an unrelated incident at the time of the ceremony.
SELTERS, Germany Andreas Bonk, one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and his son Jorim were among those who received awards on April 16, 2015, for helping to save the lives of three victims of a fiery car crash.
The awards were presented in a ceremony attended by the minister of the interior of the Federal State of Baden-Württemberg, in southwest Germany, and by two mayors, from Obersulm and Waiblingen, the honorees’ home towns.
Minister of the Interior Reinhold Gall (top image, third from right) awarded to Andreas Bonk the Medal for Saving Lives of the Federal State of Baden-Württemberg (Lebensrettungsmedaille des Landes Baden-Württemberg).
Mr. Bonk’s wife, Christiane (top image, center), accepted the medal on his behalf, since he was hospitalized in an unrelated incident at the time of the ceremony.
During the same ceremony, the mayor of Obersulm, Tilman Schmidt (top image, far left), awarded Jorim Bonk (top image, center) a Certificate of Honor (Ehrungsurkunde).
On May 11, 2014, Andreas and Jorim Bonk were driving on the highway to a large meeting for Bible education hosted by Jehovah’s Witnesses where Andreas was scheduled to deliver a Bible discourse.
En route, they came upon a tragic car accident.
Four U.S. soldiers were trapped inside a burning car lying on its side.
The Bonks, as well as two other people, stopped to assist.
Andreas risked his life trying to help the passengers escape from the burning car until the police, fire department, and ambulance arrived.
Unfortunately, one of the soldiers died.
In their coverage of the story, the journal Sulmtaler Woche quotes Minister Gall as stating to the rescuers, "You acted bravely, valiantly, and without a thought for yourselves. "
Mayor Schmidt added, "We, the people of Obersulm, are proud of you. "
Picture taken at the scene of the crash.
Andreas Bonk explained what motivated him to perform such a courageous act: "I stopped at the scene of the accident out of concern for my fellow man.
To me, every life is precious. . . .
If I or any of my relatives were ever in such a situation, I hope that others would be decent and brave enough to step in and help. "
Jorim added, "It’s important that we don’t ignore people in need. "
The awards ceremony took place in the Obersulm Town Hall.
The German news journal STIMME.de reported on the ceremony and quoted the lord mayor of Waiblingen, Andreas Hesky (top image, second from right), as stating: "You can look back on what you did with great pride.
The town of Waiblingen is proud to have such citizens.
You are role models in our society. "
Jehovah’s Witnesses Broadcast Special Meeting Into War Zone of Ukraine
LVIV, Ukraine Jehovah’s Witnesses in Ukraine held a special meeting on February 14, 2015, designed to give pastoral support to more than 17,000 of their fellow worshippers living in the war-torn region of eastern Ukraine.
The two-hour program was video streamed live from the branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Lviv to eastern Ukraine and other locations throughout the country.
The meeting was especially timely, since a deadly rocket attack on the port city of Mariupol on January 24, 2015, damaged 3 of the Witnesses’ homes and 58 of their apartments.
One Witness was seriously wounded in the attack and another, who was only 16 years old, was killed.
Congregants gather at a Kingdom Hall in Makiyivka in the war zone to listen as the meeting is broadcast from the Ukraine branch.
In cooperation with the branch office in Russia, the Ukraine branch office arranged to record the entire program on video and stream it to Witnesses in Belarus and Russia.
As a result, another 186,258 Belarusian and Russian Witnesses saw the program in addition to the 150,841 Ukrainian Witnesses, bringing the grand total to 337,099 viewers.
Gustav Berki, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Ukraine, explains: "The reports on our relief efforts in Ukraine were a great comfort to those in the war zone.
It was also a great assurance to learn how the relief committee in Rostov-on-Don, Russia, is caring for our friends who are refugees. "
A spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Russia, Yaroslav Sivulskiy, comments: "Jehovah’s Witnesses are well-known around the world for being peaceful and remaining neutral in political affairs.
This meeting included discussions highlighting the Biblical basis for our neutrality.
It helped underscore why, whether we are Russian, Ukrainian, or citizens of any other nation, we do not take sides in military conflicts. "
Two of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Horlivka, Donetsk region survived after a rocket hit their home while they were inside.
To date, the Ukraine branch office has set up 14 Disaster Relief Committees to care for those affected by the war.
These committees have provided more than 149 tons of food and 21 tons of clothing to fellow believers and to non-Witnesses in the region.
The committees have arranged housing for more than 7,600 refugees and have been able to repair or rebuild a number of damaged or destroyed homes and Kingdom Halls (places of worship).
For example, in the city of Mariupol, merely two days after the attack, a Disaster Relief Committee was able to arrange for 160 volunteers to begin repair work on 34 damaged apartments.
A parking lot hit by rockets adjacent to a Kingdom Hall (not pictured) in Mariupol.
Mr. Berki further outlined how the relief initiatives supervised by the branch office in Ukraine provide for more than immediate physical and material needs.
He states: "In addition to this special meeting, traveling ministers continue to visit the 136 communities of Jehovah’s Witnesses in the war zone.
And, as is always the case in congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses around the world, local elders are making a concerted effort to provide comfort and spiritual encouragement to those under their care. "
Jehovah’s Witnesses Coordinate International Efforts to Aid Nepal Earthquake Victims
KATHMANDU, Nepal Jehovah’s Witnesses from Bangladesh, Germany, India, Japan, Switzerland, and the United States are coordinating their efforts to help victims of the devastating earthquake that hit Nepal on April 25, 2015, and killed thousands, including one Witness and her two children.
A second quake hit Nepal on May 12, 2015.
However, the Witnesses confirm that, in this latest earthquake, none of their members suffered major injuries, severe damage to their property, or loss of life.
Jehovah’s Witnesses provide food for fellow worshippers and other disaster victims twice a day.
The day after the first quake, representatives from the Nepal office of Jehovah’s Witnesses visited each congregation in Kathmandu Valley, an area hard hit by the quake, to assess the needs of the victims.
The quake had destroyed 38 of the Witnesses’ homes and damaged 126 others.
Those displaced were given shelter in the homes of fellow worshippers, in their places of worship called Kingdom Halls, and in tents set up in open areas.
The Nepal office also began supplying food, which was soon augmented by supplies from Bangladesh, India, and the Nepali cities of Birgunj, Damauli, Mahendranagar, and Pokhara.
A Disaster Relief Committee is coordinating the ongoing efforts of Witness volunteers from India, Japan, and Nepal in the construction of temporary shelters.
Volunteers from the Nepal office of Jehovah’s Witnesses store relief materials that have arrived from the Nepali city of Birgunj.
A spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Nepal, Reuben Thapaliya, states: "We are concerned not only with the physical needs of the victims of this disaster but also with their spiritual well-being.
Along with our efforts to supply food, water, and shelter, we have mobilized to provide pastoral support. "
A representative from the world headquarters of Jehovah’s Witnesses, Gary Breaux, traveled through the affected region May 2-5, 2015, and visited congregations and individual families.
On May 4, 2015, Mr. Breaux spoke during a special Bible-based program that was presented simultaneously via video streaming to other congregations in the region.
Additionally, a representative of the Japan branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses, Kenji Chichii, arrived on May 5, 2015.
He also visited families in the area and gave encouraging, Bible-based talks.
A representative from the world headquarters of Jehovah’s Witnesses, Gary Breaux (right), surveys the damage to one home.
The branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Germany assembled a medical team of Witnesses consisting of an anesthesiologist, a surgeon, a nurse, and a paramedic.
Equipped with medicine supplied by Witnesses in Bangladesh, India, and Japan, as well as mobile equipment for surgery and intensive care, this team from Europe worked with the Nepal Disaster Relief Committee to treat patients at Kingdom Halls in the earthquake zone.
The relief team is based in a Kingdom Hall in Kathmandu where Witness victims are given food and shelter.
J. R. Brown, an international spokesman at the world headquarters of Jehovah’s Witnesses, states: "Our relief efforts are ongoing, because we recognize that victims of disasters have needs that go beyond physical recovery from a catastrophic event.
Our fellow worshippers in Nepal and other earthquake survivors can be assured of our active spiritual and material assistance.
They remain in our thoughts and prayers. "
Largest Book Fair in the Spanish-Speaking World Hosts Jehovah’s Witnesses
MEXICO CITY Jehovah’s Witnesses were invited to participate in the Guadalajara International Book Fair, the world’s largest book fair for Spanish-speaking countries and the second largest in the world after the Frankfurt Book Fair in Germany.
The event was held in Guadalajara, Mexico, from November 29 to December 7, 2014, and drew over 760,000 visitors.
Over 4,000 copies of the two-volume set Questions Young People Ask Answers That Work were distributed to the public.
Alongside some 1,900 publishing houses from 44 countries, Jehovah’s Witnesses participated in the cultural event with a booth featuring the Bible and Bible-related publications, including books addressing the specific needs of families, teenagers, and children.
Gamaliel Camarillo, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Mexico, states, "During the four days that we operated the booth, we had over 10,000 visitors and distributed almost 29,000 pieces of literature, free of charge.
However, our goal is to do more than distribute literature.
Our magazines and books are designed to highlight the Bible’s practical advice, which benefits millions each day.
Jehovah’s Witnesses Launch "Imitate Jesus! "
Convention Series in 11 US Cities
NEW YORK Jehovah’s Witnesses will start the first of their "Imitate Jesus! "
Conventions in the United States on Friday morning, May 22, 2015.
Over the weekend, these free public events will be held at 11 venues, including the historic Stanley Theater in Jersey City, New Jersey (lead photo).
The Witnesses expect the combined daily peak attendance from all 11 venues to reach over 41,000.
J. R. Brown, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses at their world headquarters in Brooklyn, New York, comments: "All who accept our invitation to join us at the convention in their region will receive a very warm welcome, and we believe they will be happy they took the time to attend.
The ‘Imitate Jesus!’ Conventions promise three days of fascinating presentations of Jesus’ dynamic teachings, designed to help people of all ages and circumstances. "
Throughout the summer and continuing through January 2016, Jehovah’s Witnesses will hold some 5,000 "Imitate Jesus! "
Conventions in 92 lands.
The program, arranged by the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses, will be presented in whole or in part in 347 languages, including 55 sign languages.
Witnesses Mobilize Relief Aid for Victims of Chile Floods
A Kingdom Hall in Copiapó was inundated with water and mud.
SANTIAGO, Chile Heavy rains inundated the Atacama region of northern Chile on March 25, 2015, triggering mudslides and flash floods the worst in the area in 80 years.
Over 30,000 people have been affected by this disaster, with close to 3,000 displaced to emergency shelters and at least 25 confirmed dead.
The branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Chile reported that no Witnesses were killed or seriously injured.
However, seven homes of Witnesses were destroyed and dozens more were damaged.
One Kingdom Hall, a place of worship, was completely destroyed and two others were damaged by the flooding.
Property destroyed in the city of Diego de Almagro, a town severely damaged by the floods.
In Copiapó, one of the cities hardest hit by the floods, Jehovah’s Witnesses formed a relief committee to gather information and organize the cleanup efforts.
A representative of the branch office has also been sent to provide support and spiritual encouragement to Witnesses in the affected region.
Witnesses from the cities of Antofagasta, Arica, Calama, Caldera, Iquique, and La Serena immediately sent supplies to support their fellow worshippers in need.
Witnesses gather relief supplies at a Kingdom Hall in the city of Alto Hospicio for delivery to affected areas.
Jason Reed, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Chile, said: "We feel for the victims of this tragedy, and our relief committee is poised to assist with the long-term cleanup and rebuilding work.
Our efforts are also focused on providing comfort and encouragement to everyone devastated by the floods. "
Jehovah’s Witnesses Open American Sign Language Translation Office in Florida
FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. On November 14, 2014, Jehovah’s Witnesses began relocating their American Sign Language (ASL) translation team to Fort Lauderdale, Florida, from the Watchtower Educational Center in Patterson, New York.
The Witnesses have been translating the Bible and their Bible-based publications into ASL from their Patterson facility since 1995.
For the past few months, the Witnesses have been retrofitting the Fort Lauderdale property with new offices and recording studios.
As of May 2015, the Witnesses’ ASL translation office has been fully operational.
The Witnesses make their ASL videos available online at jw.org and on DVD.
They also regularly incorporate them into weekly meetings held in over 500 congregations worldwide as well as events held in large venues, including biannual assemblies and annual regional conventions.
"Our goal is to ensure that our videos are easily understood by the majority of ASL users, regardless of their country of origin or educational background, " states Jonathan Galvez, who coordinates the Witnesses’ ASL translation team in Florida.
He continues: "There are some 45 countries where ASL is used and, as is the case with spoken languages, deaf people have regional accents when signing.
Now that our operations have moved to Fort Lauderdale, our translators are immersed in a city with a larger and more diverse population of international ASL users. "
In 2014, Frank Bechter, who has a doctorate in sociocultural and linguistic anthropology, attended an ASL regional convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Richmond, Virginia, as part of his linguistic and anthropological research concerning sign language and the deaf community.
Dr. Bechter comments, "Your organization’s dedication to quality ASL translation and presentation indeed seemed quite clear at the Richmond event, particularly because of the repeated use of your well-prepared video translations of Bible verses.
I found the ASL in them to be superb. "
He continues, "I do appreciate the Witnesses’ efforts in translating the Bible so well into ASL, because it is a very important document in our society and in the history of the world.
And I believe that deaf people should, like anyone, have good access to the important documents that have shaped the world. "
Translation teams of Jehovah’s Witnesses around the globe have produced and distributed numerous video publications in some 80 sign languages free of charge.
Jehovah’s Witnesses have also produced the JW Library Sign Language app that allows users to easily download, organize, and play sign-language videos from jw.org.
Guatemalan Schools Address Youth Violence; Request Publications From Jehovah’s Witnesses
MEXICO CITY Three schools in Guatemala requested publications from Jehovah’s Witnesses for use in their curriculum.
The Witnesses responded by donating a total of 3,500 pieces of literature in Spanish and Quiché.
Quiché is an American Indian language of the Mayan family, spoken in the western highlands of Guatemala.
Official Rural Coeducational Elementary School in Paraje Xepec: Teacher instructing class using My Book of Bible Stories and My Bible Lessons, donated by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
The schools contacted Jehovah’s Witnesses because they are one of the few organizations that produce literature in Quiché and several of their publications address issues that Guatemalan youths face.
In an official document from the Official Rural Coeducational Elementary School in Paraje Xepec, Professor Maria Cortez outlined that the literature was requested "to rescue the values and moral principles that are much needed in society. "
Elisa Molina de Sthall Official Rural Coeducational School: Students reading from My Book of Bible Stories in Quiché.
Recent studies indicate that criminality and violence among youths is prevalent throughout Guatemala.
For this reason, organizations in Guatemala such as the Violence Prevention Program (VPP) have been created with the goal of engaging "students, parents, educators, local authorities, and civil society to plan safe zones around schools and provide activities and vocational training for youth[s] and young adults. "
In line with these initiatives, the National Institute of Basic Education with Agricultural Orientation (INEBOA), the Elisa Molina de Sthall Official Rural Coeducational School (EORM), and the Official Rural Coeducational Elementary School in Paraje Xepec, requested copies of My Book of Bible Stories in Quiché.
The INEBOA also requested the Witnesses’ youth-oriented publications Volumes 1 and 2 of Questions Young People Ask-Answers that Work in Spanish.
The school gave copies of the books to parents so that they can help their children prepare the homework lessons for culture class.
Additionally, the school added the video The Prodigal Returns, produced by Jehovah’s Witnesses, to their curriculum.
Erick De Paz, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Guatemala, states: "While our primary focus is to share our Bible-based message with people in their homes, we are happy that our publications are useful to teachers and parents for helping young people. "
Witnesses Assist Victims of Flooding in Angola
A Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Lobito that was inundated with 70 cm (2 ft) of mud and water.
LUANDA, Angola Beginning on March 11, 2015, torrential rains triggered floods that killed 85 people and destroyed 119 homes in the province of Benguela, located some 500 kilometers (310 miles) from the capital of Luanda.
The branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Angola reported that no Witnesses were killed, but 11 of the Witnesses’ homes were destroyed or severely damaged.
In Lobito, one Kingdom Hall a local house of worship also sustained flood damage.
On the morning following the rainstorm, the Witnesses established a disaster relief committee to assess the damage and organize relief assistance.
The Witnesses provided aid to both their fellow worshippers and non-Witnesses in the affected area.
At the Kingdom Hall in Lobito, volunteers removed 70 centimeters (2 feet) of mud and water and completed other repairs in time to hold one of a series of special meetings on the weekend following the destructive rains.
Representatives of the Angola branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses traveled to the meetings from Luanda, providing spiritual comfort and encouragement to the local Witnesses.
Local Witness volunteers cleaned and repaired a damaged Kingdom Hall in Lobito.
A spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Angola, Todd Peckham, states: "We empathize with all who are recovering from the devastation of these floods.
The branch office in Angola will continue to oversee the work of the disaster relief committee and provide support to those in the community. "
Jehovah’s Witnesses Announce 2015 Convention Series to Begin in May
NEW YORK Jehovah’s Witnesses begin their 2015 convention series in the United States on May 22.
The 2015 "Imitate Jesus! "
Regional Conventions will continue worldwide through January 2016.
For each convention venue, local Witnesses will launch a three-week campaign to invite the public to attend the program free of charge.
"This year’s convention theme recognizes Jesus Christ as a universally known figure and a positive role model for people of all ages, backgrounds, and cultures, " states J. R. Brown, spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses at their world headquarters in Brooklyn, New York.
"We believe that the public will enjoy the fresh presentation of significant events in Jesus’ life.
This year’s program promises an interactive approach, incorporating meaningful and exciting video features that will show how we can benefit from imitating Jesus in our everyday lives. "
Exact dates and locations of the 2015 "Imitate Jesus! "
Regional Conventions can be found on the Witnesses’ official website, jw.org.
Journalists may contact the nearest branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses for more information, including the name of a local media contact for reporters planning to cover the convention.
The New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures in Tzotzil Is Released in Mexico
Geoffrey Jackson, a member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses, releases the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures in Tzotzil.
He is wearing a Jerkil, a traditional Tzotzil vest made of wool.
MEXICO CITY Jehovah’s Witnesses released the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures in Tzotzil at a convention held December 26-28, 2014, in Tuxtla Gutierrez, Chiapas.
The "Keep Seeking First God’s Kingdom! "
Regional Convention was presented in Tzotzil, a Mayan language, and was transmitted to another venue in Comitan, Chiapas.
In addition to the Bible, all 5,073 in attendance received six more new publications in Tzotzil.
A spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Mexico, Gamaliel Camarillo, states: "We are thrilled with the release of the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures in Tzotzil.
We look forward to sharing this translation with our Tzotzil-speaking neighbors. "
Tzotzil-speaking Witnesses using the newly released New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures at the convention in Chiapas, Mexico.
The Tzotzil language is spoken by over 350,000 people in Baja California, Campeche, Chiapas, Oaxaca, and Veracruz, according to the Secretariat of Public Education for Mexico.
In order to share the Bible’s message with the Tzotzil people, the Witnesses have set up a remote translation office for the Tzotzil language composed of 15 translators located in San Cristobal de las Casas, Chiapas.
In 2002, the Witnesses released their first publication in Tzotzil.
Jehovah’s Witnesses now have more than 60 Tzotzil publications available for download on their official website, jw.org.
Russian Witness Finds 6,000 Euros and Returns Money to Owner
PETERSBURG, Russia In November 2014, Svetlana Nemchinova, one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, found an envelope on the street containing 6,000 euros (over $6,800 U.S.).
After a lengthy search for the owner, she was able to return the money.
Ms. Nemchinova’s altruism was reported on television, the radio, and in several online news articles.
Ms. Nemchinova is a street cleaner in the city of Vologda, approximately 450 kilometers (280 mi) northeast of Moscow.
While on the job, she noticed a plain envelope.
Looking inside, she discovered a large sum of money.
Although Ms. Nemchinova and her three children live modestly in a 12-square-meter (129 sq ft) apartment, she states: "I didn’t even think of keeping the money.
Right away I thought about the person who surely was feeling terrible. "
In an effort to find the owner, Ms. Nemchinova first posted an announcement on nearby buildings.
When no one responded, Ms. Nemchinova took the money to a nearby bank, since the envelope of money contained a receipt with the bank’s name on it.
The bank determined that the money belonged to Pavel Smirnov.
After making several attempts to contact Mr. Smirnov, the bank was finally able to inform him that Ms. Nemchinova found his money.
An article published in the Russian newspaper Premier states: "Svetlana does not see anything outstanding in her actions.
She is a religious person and regularly reads the Bible. "
Ms. Nemchinova further explained to Premier that her actions were a result of applying what is often called the Golden Rule from Matthew 7:12: "All things, therefore, that you want men to do to you, you also must do to them. "
Artist Pavel Smirnov poses with Svetlana Nemchinova after she returned his lost money.
Mr. Smirnov, an artist who invented a special composition of paint, had been saving the money to purchase specialized equipment to further his research of dye structures.
"Words cannot express how thankful I am to Svetlana, " stated Mr. Smirnov.
"After what Svetlana did, your faith in people is restored.
There is only one thing left to say: ‘There is a God!’ "
Jehovah’s Witnesses Organize Relief Efforts in the Wake of Cyclone Pam
NOUMEA, New Caledonia Beginning on the night of March 13, 2015, Tropical Cyclone Pam tore through the Pacific island nation of Vanuatu with Category 5 winds.
Initial reports from the branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in New Caledonia indicate that no Witnesses in Vanuatu were killed or injured during the cataclysmic storm.
The scope of the damage is still being assessed, but it has been confirmed that on the island of Efate, 31 of the Witnesses’ homes were destroyed and 58 seriously damaged.
On the island of Tanna, almost all of the homes of the Witnesses were either severely damaged or destroyed.
Cyclone winds also destroyed three Kingdom Halls, while another was damaged by a falling tree.
A disaster relief committee based in Vanuatu’s capital, Port Vila, has provided food, potable water, and basic shelters to some 100 Witness families.
In addition, one ton of relief supplies was sent to the Witnesses in Tanna to provide for their immediate needs.
The branch office in Australia is working along with the branch office in New Caledonia to support the relief efforts, which will include building shelters, repairing damaged houses, and supplying bedding material, clothing, and other provisions.
Jean-Pierre Francine, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in New Caledonia, states: "We are grateful for the aid from abroad as well as the government agencies that have assisted our fellow worshipers.
Now that flights to Vanuatu have resumed, a representative of the branch office in New Caledonia and traveling ministers are visiting the island to offer not only practical support but also comfort and spiritual assistance. "
Twenty Million Estimated to Attend Witnesses’ Annual Event
NEW YORK After sundown on Friday, April 3, 2015, Jehovah’s Witnesses will observe the Memorial of Christ’s death, an event that they consider the most important of the year.
The commemoration includes a 45-minute public discourse entitled "Appreciate What Christ Has Done for You! "
In the weeks leading up to this special occasion, the Witnesses will engage in a global campaign to invite their neighbors, friends, and family members to attend.
J. R. Brown, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses at their world headquarters in Brooklyn, New York, states: "Last year, some 8 million Jehovah’s Witnesses reached out to invite the public to the Memorial of Christ’s death, and a total of nearly 20 million were in attendance.
This year, we anticipate exceeding that number. "
Witnesses Provide Air and Ground Relief After Destructive Floods in Mozambique
MAPUTO, Mozambique Weeks of unusually heavy rains from December through mid-January in the Zambezia province of Mozambique led to devastating floods that killed 158 people.
The branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Mozambique reports that no Witnesses have been killed or injured.
However, the floodwaters damaged two places of worship, called Kingdom Halls, and destroyed 225 homes of Witnesses.
Witness volunteers prepare to airlift food supplies to the isolated Chire district of Zambezia.
The Witnesses established several disaster relief committees to care for the needs of their members in the affected area.
Some Kingdom Halls were also used as temporary shelters and food distribution centers.
In Chire, which is located approximately 950 miles (1,500 km) from Maputo, floodwaters destroyed the bridges that gave access to the area, isolating more than 1,300 Witnesses.
The Institute for Civil Aviation of Mozambique granted the Witnesses permission to airdrop over 17 tons of relief supplies into the region via helicopter.
In Morrumbala, bags of corn and corn seed being loaded for distribution
A spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Mozambique, Alberto Libombo, states: "It has been wonderful to see the generosity of our members in helping with our local relief efforts.
The branch office in Mozambique is continuing to organize the delivery of basic foodstuffs and is arranging to rebuild and repair homes.
We will continue to do all we can to keep providing spiritual comfort and assistance to the victims. "
Kingdom Hall in Chiromo used as a temporary distribution center
Witnesses Feature New Kazakh Bible at Convention and Open House
Gerrit Lösch of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses releases the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures in Kazakh.
ALMATY, Kazakhstan The New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures was released in Kazakh at a convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses held September 26-28, 2014.
All 3,721 in attendance were able to receive a copy of the new Bible.
Dr. Alexander Garkavets, a specialist in Turkic philology, commented on the New World Translation in Kazakh: "Despite the limited resources for translating holy texts into Kazakh, the Witness translators did a remarkable job.
It is very commendable how they revealed new ways of expressing the source text ideas in Kazakh.
The New World Translation reflects the current vernacular and is thus easily understood by all. "
Open house: The Witnesses set up a traditional yurt (nomadic dwelling) where refreshments were served.
The week following the convention, on October 3, the branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Kazakhstan held an open house and featured the new Kazakh Bible.
The Kazakhstan-based news agency Radio Azattyq reported on the event: "The center was visited by the officials of the Akimat (state regional administration) of the city of Almaty, led by the head of the Department of Religious Affairs, Mr. Nurzhan Zhaparkul, representatives of the foreign diplomatic missions, experts in religious studies, and others. "
Mr. Zhaparkul observed, "Jehovah’s Witnesses welcomed us very openly for this event in their center in Almaty.
This initiative is very commendable and helps us in our work very much. "
Nurzhan Zhaparkul (center), head of the Department of Religious Affairs, and other officials from the Committee of Religious Affairs tour the branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses during the open house.
Invitations to the open house were distributed in Almaty.
A spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Kazakhstan, Polat Bekzhan, states: "We were very pleased with the response to our convention this year and how well the Kazakh Bible was received among the growing Kazakh-speaking community.
Our goal in organizing the open house was also accomplished, offering government officials, the media, and our neighbors an opportunity to become more familiar with Jehovah’s Witnesses. "
Auschwitz Survivors Mark 70th Anniversary of Liberation, Jehovah’s Witnesses Among Those Remembered
WARSAW, Poland On January 27, 2015, thousands will commemorate the 70th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz, a Nazi German concentration and death camp.
This infamous camp, primarily used to eliminate racial groups targeted by the Nazis, was also a mechanism for persecuting Jehovah’s Witnesses of various nationalities, including Germans.
The Auschwitz-Birkenau State Museum and the International Auschwitz Council are organizing the event.
The president of Poland, Bronisław Komorowski, is expected to attend, and several countries from around the world will send official state delegations.
Auschwitz is located in the suburbs of Oświęcim, a Polish city annexed by the Nazis during World War II.
It began as a German concentration camp with some 700 Polish prisoners arriving there in June 1940.
Auschwitz quickly grew into a massive complex with over 40 camps and subcamps.
The four gas chambers in Auschwitz-Birkenau claimed as many as 20,000 lives a day.
At least 1.1 million people, including over 400 Jehovah’s Witnesses, were sent to Auschwitz during its almost five years of operation.
According to the Auschwitz-Birkenau State Museum website: "Aside from brief mentions, the literature on the history of Auschwitz Concentration Camp does not take account of the Jehovah’s Witnesses (referred to in the camp records as Bible [Students]) who were imprisoned because of their religious convictions.
These prisoners deserve closer attention because of the way they managed to hold on to their moral principles under camp conditions. "
Museum records indicate that Jehovah’s Witnesses were among the first prisoners sent to Auschwitz, and of the hundreds of Witnesses sent, over 35 percent died there.
Andrzej Szalbot (Prisoner–IBV 108703): In 1943, arrested by Nazis and sent to Auschwitz for conscientiously objecting to military service.
The Nazi government targeted the activity of Jehovah’s Witnesses as early as 1933 and banned the organization throughout Germany.
The Witnesses’ moral principles and practices were not compatible with Nazi ideology.
For example, the Witnesses would not offer the obligatory "Heil Hitler!, " as they considered paying homage to Hitler a betrayal of their loyalty to God.
The Witnesses also refused to perform any military-related duties, a stand the regime considered to be anti-state.
"To refuse military service meant being sent to a concentration camp, " explains Andrzej Szalbot, who was arrested in 1943 and sent to Auschwitz at only 19 years of age.
Jehovah’s Witnesses were promised immediate freedom if they signed a document renouncing their membership in the organization and declaring that its teachings were erroneous.
Mr. Szalbot refused to sign.
Jehovah’s Witnesses were promised release if they renounced their faith by signing a declaration similar to this one.
Official Nazi documentation refers to Jehovah’s Witnesses by using the abbreviation "IBV, " which stood for Internationale Bibelforscher-Vereinigung (International Bible Students Association), the official German name of their organization.
The Nazis required the Witnesses to wear a purple triangle on their uniforms.
This symbol helped the Witnesses to identify their fellow believers in the camp.
They met every evening before roll call for mutual support.
Secret meetings were also organized to discuss the Bible with prisoners who were impressed by the Witnesses’ kindness and faith.
A number of prisoners became Jehovah’s Witnesses while in Auschwitz camps.
On Saturday morning, January 27, 1945, the Soviet Union’s Red Army arrived in Oświęcim.
By 3 p.m., the Soviet forces had liberated some 7,000 prisoners from Auschwitz I, Auschwitz II (Birkenau), and Auschwitz III (Monowitz).
Stanisław Zając.
Arrived in Auschwitz on February 16, 1943.
Stanisław Zając, one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, was among the tens of thousands forced by the Nazis to evacuate the Auschwitz camps in anticipation of the Red Army’s approach.
Mr. Zając and about 3,200 other prisoners left the Jaworzno subcamp and trudged through deep snow as part of the infamous death march.
It is estimated that less than 2,000 survived the three-day walk to Blechhammer, an outlying Auschwitz subcamp located in the forest.
In his memoirs, Mr. Zając recalled the battle that ensued while he and other prisoners were hiding in the camp: "We could hear tanks passing by, but nobody got up the courage to go and see to whom they belonged.
In the morning, it turned out they were Russian. . . .
The Russian army was filling the wide clearing and this is where my concentration camp nightmare ended. "
This year, on January 27, conferences and exhibitions related to the 70th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz will take place in various cities around the world.
One Year After Typhoon Haiyan, Storm Victims Settle Into New Homes
MANILA, Philippines Jehovah’s Witnesses launched a massive construction effort following Super Typhoon Haiyan to repair or rebuild almost 750 homes in less than one year.
On average, a team of five construction volunteers could rebuild a home in five days.
Dean Jacek, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Philippines, explains: "We set a goal of completing the work by September 2014.
Building work began early in the first part of the year and, with the help of so many volunteers, the construction was completed before the end of August. "
Local and international volunteers assisted in the rebuilding effort.
The Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses allocated donations sent by fellow worshippers from around the world to fund the relief project.
The Witnesses’ branch office in Manila established relief committees to organize the rebuilding work in the affected areas.
This included the repair or complete reconstruction of 167 homes in Tacloban City, 256 homes in Ormoc City, 101 homes in Cebu City, and 218 homes in Roxas City.
A volunteer workforce, made up of 522 Witnesses from the Philippines and 90 Witnesses from other countries, participated in the work.
Rep. Ferdinand Martin G. Romualdez, First District of Leyte.
Mr. Ferdinand Martin G. Romualdez, representative of the First District of Leyte, observed: "The Jehovah’s Witnesses were one of the first non-government groups to undertake a house-rebuilding initiative. . . .
Words cannot fully express the appreciation and gratitude of my family and our people. "
International Convention Coverage: Witnesses Release Bible at World Cup Stadium in Seoul
David Splane, a member of the Governing Body, releases the revised New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures in Korean.
SEOUL Jehovah’s Witnesses released the revised New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures in Korean during the "Keep Seeking First God’s Kingdom! "
International Convention in Seoul, Korea.
The event was held in the Seoul World Cup Stadium on September 6-8, 2014.
Bibles were made available free of charge to all 56,867 in attendance, as well as to the 59,091 tied-in at satellite locations in Busan, Daejeon, Gwangju, Jeju, Suwon, and Yeosu.
In the words of one attendee, Joon-yeong Choi, "The most unforgettable moment of this convention was the release of the revised New World Translation. "
The over 56,000 attendees in the stadium enjoy the Bible-based program.
Witnesses from Canada, Finland, the Philippines, Poland, and the United States traveled to attend the program in Seoul.
Dae-il Hong, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Korea, stated: "We worked hard in preparing for this stirring, educational event, and the convention exceeded our expectations.
It was an honor to host this special occasion. "
Bible sculptures decorating the field.
The audience in the Seoul World Cup Stadium was thrilled when three large Bible sculptures decorating the field were revealed to be baptismal pools.
A total of 630 people were baptized in Seoul and an additional 596 at the satellite locations, for a combined total of 1,226 baptized.
Bible sculptures used as baptismal pools.
Jehovah’s Witnesses Provide Stimulus for Bloodless Surgery in Denmark
COPENHAGEN, Denmark Denmark’s top media outlets have been reporting that the Capital Region’s medical community is adopting a new approach to blood management.
According to the journal Kristeligt Dagblad, "it has been discovered that many more patients can do without donated blood. "
The journal continues, "Jehovah’s Witnesses have been the reason why blood-free surgery has been introduced. "
Based on their religious convictions, the over 8,000,000 Jehovah’s Witnesses worldwide, including over 14,000 members in Denmark, seek the best medical care available without blood transfusions.
Danish hospitals have been known as the largest per capita users of donated blood in the world, even as much as 50-100 percent more than other European hospitals.
However, in the article "Bloodless Surgery is Gaining Ground, " the news site Politiken notes, "Jehovah’s Witnesses get doctors to explore alternatives " to treatments often performed with donated blood.
In caring for Witness patients, some doctors have begun using a number of blood conservation practices, such as preoperative use of erythropoietin and iron and B-complex vitamins, and intraoperative use of antifibrinolytics.
According to The Copenhagen Post, "each year, between five and ten Jehovah’s Witnesses go through extensive heart surgery at Aarhus University Hospital Skejby " without the use of donated blood.
Rigshospitalet, a highly specialized hospital and one of Denmark’s largest educational institutions for medical sciences, initiated a blood management project in 2009 for the Capital Region.
The medical community in Denmark has also recognized a growing body of clinical evidence that blood transfusions carry significant risks.
Rigshospitalet, in Copenhagen, instituted a blood management project in 2009, which the newspaper Berlingske reports has significantly reduced the usage of donated blood and has resulted in patients having "fewer complications and a lower mortality rate. "
Most of the other hospitals in the Capital Region have since joined the project, and hospitals in other regions are planning to follow suit.
Berlingske also relates how Dr. Morten Bagge Hansen, a researcher and head of the blood bank at Rigshospitalet, describes Denmark’s significant reduction in the use of donated blood as "substantial progress that really benefits the patients. "
Further, Denmark Radio and Kristeligt Dagblad both cite Dr. Astrid Nørgaard, Medical Director at Rigshospitalet, as concluding that "bloodless surgery would not be where it is today, if it were not for Jehovah’s Witnesses. "
Officials in Mexico Applaud Witnesses’ Cleanup of Community Sports Facility
MEXICO CITY Over 250 Jehovah’s Witnesses volunteered to help clean the Baldomero "Melo " Almada sports facility on June 7, 2014, in preparation for a special community event, moving local officials to express appreciation.
For months, Professor Antonio Cota Márquez, the director of the Municipal Sports Institute in Huatabampo, Mexico, sought volunteers to help clean the stadium in time for the governor to inaugurate the new running track on July 7, 2014.
Jehovah’s Witnesses responded favorably to the director’s request and assisted him and the facility’s cleaning personnel with much-needed improvements, including removing garbage from the stadium, repainting the basketball backboards, and caring for grounds maintenance.
Auditorium, within the sports facility, where the Witnesses hold free Bible-education programs.
Director Cota decided to contact the Witnesses because he was already familiar with how they care for one of the auditoriums at the sports facility where they regularly hold free Bible-education programs in the Spanish and Mayo languages.
After observing the way the Witnesses cleaned and repaired the facility, Director Cota said in an interview: "We are glad to see selfless people who are devoting some of their time to clean our sports facility. "
He later made the statement: "On behalf of our mayor, Ramón Díaz Nieblas, please accept our appreciation for your work this day.
We will continue to support your organization’s use of this facility.
We are very pleased with your responsible and cooperative work. "
Witnesses Assist Victims of Hiroshima Mudslides
EBINA, Japan Heavy rainfalls in Hiroshima led to catastrophic landslides that killed some 74 people and displaced over 1,600 on the morning of August 20, 2014.
The branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Japan reports that no Witnesses were killed or injured, although eight homes of the Witnesses were damaged.
Interior of a damaged home in Hiroshima.
About 8.5 inches [218 mm] of rain fell over the course of only three hours, causing extensive damage and prompting the government to initiate a national rescue effort.
The Japan branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses quickly established a disaster relief committee and organized Witness volunteers to help with the clean-up.
The clean-up crews formed a bucket brigade to remove dirt and sand that had washed into homes.
The volunteers also disinfected cleared areas after storing any salvageable household goods.
Witnesses remove mud and sludge from a residential building.
National newspaper Yomiuri Shimbun documented the efforts of one of Jehovah’s Witnesses who survived the accident.
The newspaper reported that Kayoko Nakamizo, who lives in the Yagi district of Asaminami Ward, escaped out of her own home and then "she knocked on each door, checking on the safety of the residents. "
As a result, Kayoko was able to help rescue a neighbor and assist others in evacuating from the disaster area.
Ichiki Matsunaga, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Japan, states: "We empathize with those who have been affected by the mudslides.
In spite of the difficult situation, we are maintaining a positive attitude as we do our best to provide practical help and comfort to our neighbors. "
Update: Jehovah’s Witnesses Organize Relief for Thousands Displaced in Ukraine
LVIV, Ukraine Jehovah’s Witnesses continue to assist fellow worshippers displaced by the war that has gripped the eastern region of Ukraine.
Of the approximately 7,500 Witnesses that have fled the war zone, almost 4,000 are being cared for by seven disaster relief committees organized by the Lviv branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
The remaining victims are being accommodated by relatives and fellow worshippers in Ukraine and Russia.
Six additional relief committees are caring for the more than 17,500 Witnesses still living in the war zone.
Bombs destroyed several homes of the Witnesses, including this one in the village of Semenivka, in the Donetsk region.
The Lviv branch confirmed that a total of six Witnesses have lost their lives since the war began.
One Witness in Kramatorsk died on June 17, 2014, when a bomb exploded next to the car he was in.
Bombs also took the lives of five other Witnesses living in the cities of Donetsk, Sloviansk, Rozkishne, and Luhansk.
As part of their relief aid, the branch office is also coordinating the rebuilding of several of the Witnesses’ places of worship and homes.
Witnesses repairing the roof of a damaged home in the city of Sloviansk.
Fatal Bus Accident in Honduras
On the morning of October 31, 2014, a bus transporting 57 Jehovah’s Witnesses, who had volunteered to provide Bible education in Las Flores Lempira, crashed en route from San Carlos Choloma.
The accident resulted in the death of the commercial bus driver and thirteen Witness passengers, which included two fourteen-year-old girls and an eight-year-old girl.
The 44 surviving Witnesses were taken to the hospital for examination.
Only two required extensive medical care but have since been released.
Fellow worshippers are providing comfort and practical assistance.
On November 1, 2014, the first funeral was held in Choloma for nine of the victims who died in the crash.
Some 3,000 people attended.
José Castillo, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Honduras, stated: "We appreciate the outpouring of support from the community and the various agencies that have come to the aid of those affected by this tragedy. "
Amid Conflict in Ukraine Jehovah’s Witnesses Assemble Peacefully; Release Bible
Anthony Morris of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses releases the revised New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures.
LVIV, Ukraine Despite the war in eastern Ukraine, Jehovah’s Witnesses gathered in Lviv from July 4-6, 2014, for their "Keep Seeking First God’s Kingdom! "
Regional Convention.
The revised New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, rendered in modern Ukrainian, was released by Anthony Morris, a member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
The local branch office of the Witnesses arranged for key portions of the convention to be transmitted by video to 8 cities and an additional 62 locations in the Donetsk area, where fighting has been concentrated.
The attendance, including the satellite locations, reached 82,832, with a peak of 18,336 at the stadium in Lviv.
A total of 1,068 were baptized.
A peak of 18,336 attended the "Keep Seeking First God’s Kingdom! "
Convention at Arena Lviv.
On the first day of the convention, the program was interrupted by a bomb threat, resulting in the immediate evacuation of the stadium.
The entire stadium of more than 16,000 people emptied within 11 minutes, but the program quickly resumed once the authorities confirmed that the threat was a false alarm.
Vasyl Kobel, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Ukraine, states: "We were delighted to host so many visitors at our convention.
The highlight was receiving the revised New World Translation in Ukrainian, which was first released in English in October 2013.
We are excited to share with our neighbors the Bible’s promise of a peaceful future, especially during this turbulent time in our country’s history. "
International Convention Coverage: Olympic Stadium in Greece Welcomes Jehovah’s Witnesses
Samuel Herd (pictured right), a member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses, concluded each day with a Bible lecture that was translated into Greek.
The event also featured a baptism on Saturday, June 28; a total of 337 people, 305 in Greece and 32 in Cyprus, were baptized.
ATHENS, Greece Jehovah’s Witnesses in Greece hosted the "Keep Seeking First God’s Kingdom! "
International Convention at the Olympic Athletic Center of Athens, the site of the 2004 Olympic Games, on June 27-29, 2014.
An audience of 35,863 Bible students gathered at the stadium.
During select portions of the program, another 3,093 people were tied in by video in Belgium and Cyprus, bringing the total peak attendance to 38,956.
Convention attendees included delegates from Croatia, Hungary, Korea, Romania, South Africa, Turkey, and the United States.
Christina Michail, the manager of the main Olympic stadium, commented: "It was delightful to see people from so many races, from different countries, all sitting together, taking photographs together; and I liked the loving atmosphere . . .
This is really noteworthy.
We usually don’t have such an experience in this stadium.
Usually we have sports fans and team supporters here, and their behavior is very different; that is why we are so impressed and delighted to watch this scene. "
Convention attendees in the Olympic Athletic Center of Athens.
Robert Kern, a spokesman for the branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Greece, added: "We have received hundreds of letters expressing gratitude for the program and the opportunity to share this experience with our international brotherhood.
It was wonderful to have so many of our fellow worshippers from other countries with us for this memorable occasion. "
Jehovah’s Witnesses in Mexico Aid Victims of Hurricane Odile
In the aftermath of Hurricane Odile, which hit the coast of Baja California Sur on Monday, September 15, 2014, Jehovah’s Witnesses from the surrounding area provided food, water, and medicine to their members affected by the storm.
No Witnesses were killed or injured in what proved to be the strongest storm to hit the peninsula since 1967.
However, the storm destroyed 82 of the Witnesses’ homes and severely damaged 85 others, displacing 125 families.
Those displaced were given shelter in the homes of fellow worshippers.
Four days before the hurricane struck, relief committees of Witness volunteers sent letters to congregations in the area outlining how to prepare.
Witness elders also arranged to relocate congregation members who lived in vulnerable structures to the homes of other Witnesses.
The branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Mexico sent over 20 tons of relief provisions to the disaster area.
Jehovah’s Witnesses Respond to Ebola Outbreak
NEW YORK As the deadly Ebola outbreak devastates West Africa, Jehovah’s Witnesses continue to proactively educate their members about the disease.
Upon learning that the Ebola virus had been found in Guinea and had quickly spread to nearby Liberia and Sierra Leone, branch offices of Jehovah’s Witnesses in the region immediately sent letters to alert all congregations in the three countries.
Incorporating guidelines and suggestions provided by local government agencies, the letters explained the dangers of the virus, how the virus is transmitted, and what precautionary measures should be taken to prevent the spread of the disease.
"Being in an area where medical diseases are not well understood and where false rumors about the source of Ebola were widespread, many people were initially confused about what to do, " states Collin Attick, spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Sierra Leone.
"But when our congregation members heard the instructions at their Kingdom Hall, they responded promptly and positively. "
In July, traveling representatives of Jehovah’s Witnesses began making special two-day visits to each congregation in Sierra Leone and Guinea.
The visits feature a talk entitled "Obedience Saves Lives, " with the objective of increasing awareness of practical safeguards against the disease as well as encouraging continued adherence to the latest guidelines available.
These visits will continue through November 2014.
Additionally, the Witnesses provided hand-washing stations containing water mixed with bleach at the entrance of each of the Witnesses’ places for worship (known as Kingdom Halls) in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone.
Most Witnesses in these countries are following that example, providing a hand-washing station at their home.
As a precaution, a Witness family cooperates with an area quarantine in Dolo’s Town, a community east of Monrovia, Liberia.
The quarantine was lifted on September 8, 2014.
According to a report by the World Health Organization dated October 1, 2014, there have been 7,178 cases reported and more than 3,300 victims have died in the current outbreak of Ebola in West Africa, although the numbers are expected to increase.
As of October 2, of the 2,800 Witnesses in Guinea and Sierra Leone, one female Witness who was a nurse contracted the Ebola virus and died on September 25, 2014.
Of the 6,365 Witnesses in Liberia, 10 have died as a result of the disease; 6 were health workers.
Although the virus has also spread into Nigeria recently, none of the Witnesses there have contracted the disease.
Additionally, no Witness missionaries in these countries are reported to be infected; as the virus was spreading, a number of these missionaries were away on vacation or attending conventions in Europe and the United States.
Some have recently returned to their missionary activity and are heeding necessary precautions and instructions from the local branch office.
Other missionaries are waiting to return due to flight restrictions or other circumstances.
A hand-washing station at a Kingdom Hall in Sierra Leone.
Relief committees of Witness volunteers are assisting local Witnesses in caring for the needs of their families and fellow worshippers in the West African countries hardest hit by Ebola.
"Following Bible principles of cleanliness and quarantine is helping us to deal with this situation, " states Thomas Nyain, Sr., spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Liberia.
"As Jehovah’s Witnesses, we also avoid unscriptural burial practices.
This is proving to be a protection for all of our members, especially during this critical time. "
In Sierra Leone, an announcement aired on a local radio station outlining how Jehovah’s Witnesses helped their members and non-Witnesses in the community to avoid the Ebola virus.
The authorities there also requested that the Witnesses’ relief committee assist the government’s agencies in the region.
"We are encouraged to see our fellow believers in West Africa exercising caution while continuing their spiritual activities and Bible education work to the extent possible, " comments J. R. Brown, international spokesman at the Witnesses’ world headquarters in New York.
"Our spiritual brothers and sisters and others coping with the impact of this Ebola virus are in our thoughts and prayers. "
International Convention Coverage: Witnesses Hold Historic Conventions at MetLife Stadium
NEW YORK On June 20-22 and June 27-29, 2014, Jehovah’s Witnesses packed the MetLife Stadium in East Rutherford, New Jersey, for the "Keep Seeking First God’s Kingdom! "
International Convention series, with programs presented in English and Spanish respectively.
With a peak attendance for both weekends totaling over 118,000, these two gatherings represented the Witnesses’ largest convention in the New York metropolitan area in decades.
Over 407,000 in other cities were tied in by video to select portions of the programs, bringing the total combined attendance to over 525,500.
Many program parts featured reenactments and videos demonstrating the practical application of Bible principles.
Both conventions concluded each day with a lecture from a member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
David Splane spoke on June 20-22; Geoffrey Jackson, on June 27-29.
Each convention also included a baptism.
A total of 1,255 people were baptized in the stadium, and another 2,930 were baptized at satellite locations, bringing the total number of those baptized to 4,185.
Attendees included delegates invited from Argentina, Australia, Belize, Britain, Chile, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Italy, Malaysia, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru, Spain, and Venezuela.
J. R. Brown, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses, states: "This event reminded many of us of our historic convention in New York back in 1958.
Between Yankee Stadium and the then existing Polo Grounds, over 253,000 attended that event.
The conventions at MetLife Stadium this year will certainly be considered milestones in the history of Jehovah’s Witnesses. "
Read an article from The Record covering the international conventions in MetLife Stadium.
A photo of the baptism was featured on the front page of the newspaper (pictured).
Jehovah’s Witnesses Pack MetLife Stadium (PDF)
Sachsenhausen Memorial to Honor One of Jehovah’s Witnesses Executed by Nazis
SELTERS, Germany On September 16, 2014, the Brandenburg Memorials Foundation will host a special event to remember the 75th anniversary of the execution of August Dickmann in the Sachsenhausen concentration camp.
He was the first conscientious objector publicly executed by the Nazis in World War II.
August Dickmann, circa 1936.
In October 1937, Mr. Dickmann was imprisoned in the Sachsenhausen concentration camp because of his beliefs as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Three days after the outbreak of World War II in 1939, the Gestapo summoned Mr. Dickmann and asked him to sign a military identification card, which would have enlisted him in the German army.
When Mr. Dickmann refused, he was placed in solitary confinement and the camp commander sought permission from the head of the SS to execute Mr. Dickmann in the presence of all other camp inmates.
On September 15, 1939, hundreds of Jehovah’s Witnesses, including Mr. Dickmann’s fleshly brother Heinrich, were forced to watch the execution.
Two days later, The New York Times reported from Germany: "August Dickmann, 29 years old, . . . has been shot here by a firing squad. "
The newspaper further noted that he was sentenced for refusing military service "because of religious scruples. "
On September 18, 1999, a plaque honoring the over 890 Jehovah’s Witnesses imprisoned in Sachsenhausen was placed on the outer wall of the former concentration camp.
Additionally, a memorial stone was unveiled in honor of Mr. Dickmann.
The 75th anniversary event will begin at the site of Mr. Dickmann’s memorial, followed by speeches made in the former prisoners’ kitchen.
Dr. Detlef Garbe, author and director of the Neuengamme Concentration Camp Memorial, will be the guest lecturer.
Lillian Gobitas Klose, Schoolgirl at Center of Historic 1940 Supreme Court Case, Dies at 90
NEW YORK Lillian Gobitas Klose, whose personal decision not to salute the flag placed her in the center of a landmark United States Supreme Court case, died in her home in Fayetteville, Georgia on August 22, 2014.
She was 90 years of age.
William Henry Gobitas (far left), Walter Gobitas, and Lillian Gobitas after the children were expelled from school for not saluting the flag in 1935.
Letter that Lillian Gobitas wrote to the Minersville School Board in 1935, defending her faith.
Lillian Gobitas and her younger brother William, both Jehovah’s Witnesses, personally decided to stop saluting the flag after hearing a national radio broadcast on October 6, 1935, that focused on Biblical commands against idolatry.
A few weeks later they were expelled from school for their stand.
Their father, Walter, filed suit to protect the rights of his children and won in the local courts.
The school board appealed to the Supreme Court and on June 3, 1940, the resulting court case, Minersville School District v. Gobitis (the family name was misspelled in the court records), was decided against the Gobitases.
Three years later, on Flag Day, June 14, 1943, the Supreme Court overturned the 1940 Gobitis ruling, in its decision of West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette, allowing Witness children to return to school.
This marked the first time in U.S. history that the Supreme Court reversed itself in such a short period of time.
Lillian Gobitas was born in Minersville, Pennsylvania, to Walter and Ruth Gobitas on November 2, 1923.
She was baptized as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses on March 14, 1935.
At the age of 20, Ms. Gobitas became a full-time Bible instructor (referred to by Witnesses as a regular pioneer) and later worked at the world headquarters of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Brooklyn, New York, from February 1946 to April 1953.
Lillian and her husband, Erwin Klose, as missionaries in Vienna, Austria, in 1954.
While attending conventions of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Europe in 1951, Ms. Gobitas met Erwin Klose at the Witnesses’ branch office in Germany.
They continued their acquaintance while Mr. Klose attended the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead, the Witnesses’ missionary school, held in South Lansing, New York.
He graduated in 1952 and accepted an assignment to Vienna, Austria.
Ms. Gobitas also graduated from the Witnesses’ missionary school in February 1954.
On March 24, 1954, she and Mr. Klose were married in Vienna and continued missionary work together in Austria.
They returned to the United States at the end of that year due to the deteriorating health of Mr. Klose, who was still suffering the effects of the brutal treatment he received in a Nazi concentration camp for being one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
They later had two children, Stephen Paul and Judith Deborah.
In 1967, the Klose family moved to Riverdale, Georgia where they expanded their Bible education ministry as a family.
Ms. Gobitas Klose is survived by her daughter, Judith Klose; two sisters, Jeanne Fry and Grace Reinisch; and a brother Paul Gobitas.
She was preceded in death by her husband, her parents, her brother William Gobitas, her sister Joy Yubeta, and her son, Stephen Paul Klose.
Witnesses Campaign to Advertise World’s Most Translated Website, JW.ORG
NEW YORK On August 1, 2014, Jehovah’s Witnesses will begin a month-long global distribution of a new tract entitled Where Can We Find Answers to Life’s Big Questions? to raise awareness of their official website, jw.org.
Accessible in about 500 languages, with publications available for download in almost 700 languages, jw.org is the world’s most translated website.
Over one million unique visitors go to jw.org each day.
The site features articles and videos offering practical advice to people of all ages, backgrounds, and circumstances.
One of these videos, entitled Why Study the Bible?, will be linked to a QR code found on the new tract.
This video merges live-action elements and animation to illustrate the practical benefits of studying the Bible.
It is currently available in over 450 languages and has been downloaded nearly 4 million times since it was released on November 18, 2013.
J. R. Brown, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses at their world headquarters in Brooklyn, New York, explains: "We are excited about this campaign.
There are some eight million of Jehovah’s Witnesses around the world, and all of us will be speaking to our neighbors about this website.
This may be the most extensive campaign that we have ever organized. "
Geoffrey Jackson, a member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses, states: "Since its launch two years ago, people all over the world have found jw.org to be an invaluable resource.
On this site, you can watch videos that can help your children, consult articles that can help your family, and even read the Bible online.
We want as many as possible to benefit from jw.org, and that’s why we initiated this special campaign. "
Witnesses Mobilize Relief Efforts in the Balkans
ZAGREB, Croatia Disaster relief committees of Witness volunteers, assisted by representatives from the branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses located in Germany, took action to aid victims of the worst flooding ever recorded in Bosnia-Herzegovina, Croatia, and Serbia.
Torrential rainfall in the Balkans from May 13-15, 2014, caused massive flooding and triggered some 3,000 landslides.
The disaster relief committees immediately provided transportation, food, clothing, and temporary housing to those displaced.
While none of Jehovah’s Witnesses were killed or injured as a result of the disaster, at least 14 of their homes were completely destroyed or severely damaged.
Also, one house of worship used by the Witnesses was destroyed.
The committees are now coordinating the repair and renovation of damaged homes as well as the building of simple pre-fabricated houses for those whose homes were lost.
Josip Liović, a spokesman for the branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Croatia, states: "We are relieved to hear that none in our congregations were harmed in this tragic event, yet our hearts go out to all who are grieving over the loss of family members and friends.
Throughout the Balkans, we are making a special effort to comfort our neighbors.
We are also grateful to our friends from Germany who have come to help us organize the relief efforts that will be needed in the coming weeks and months. "
Jehovah’s Witnesses Honored at the Gusen Concentration Camp Memorial
SELTERS, Germany On Sunday, April 13, 2014, the Gusen Concentration Camp Memorial in Austria unveiled a memorial plaque in recognition of some 450 Jehovah’s Witnesses who were imprisoned by the Nazis in the Mauthausen concentration camp and its subcamp in Gusen.
More than 130 visitors were present for the ceremony.
Commemorative plaque unveiled during a public ceremony held at the Gusen Concentration Camp Memorial on April 13, 2014.
When the Witnesses arrived at the Mauthausen concentration camp, the command leader threatened them: "No Bible Student will come out of here alive. "
Martin Poetzinger, who survived nine years of imprisonment in Dachau, Mauthausen, and Gusen and later served as a member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Brooklyn, New York, said of his time in Mauthausen: "The Gestapo tried every method to induce us to break our faith. "
May 1945: Gusen Concentration Camp.
Martin Poetzinger (seated front row, second from left) poses with 23 other survivors shortly after their release.
Some of the Witnesses in Mauthausen were later transferred to the subcamp at Gusen.
Gusen’s primary function was a "murder camp, " where deliberate and planned killings were part of the daily routine.
To keep their faith strong, the Witnesses met in small groups at night to discuss Bible texts from memory.
On one occasion, they obtained a Bible.
It was divided into parts, and each Witness took turns sharing the pages.
Hiding underneath their beds, they would read during what little free time they had.
The Witnesses also discreetly shared the Bible’s message with others.
Five Polish prisoners studied the Bible with the Witnesses and secretly got baptized in a wooden trough specially made for that purpose.
One Witness named Franz Desch shared the Bible’s message with an SS officer who later became one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Wolfram Slupina, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Austria, states: "We are grateful that the Witnesses are being remembered for their faith and courage while in the Mauthausen and Gusen camps.
Their determination to treat everyone with Christian empathy and kindness was a triumph over evil that is worthy of commemoration and imitation. "
Report on Witnesses in Ukraine and Crimea
LVIV, Ukraine The branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Ukraine reports that on June 17, 2014, one Witness in the eastern Ukrainian city of Kramatorsk was killed when a bomb exploded next to his car.
No other Witnesses have been killed or seriously injured as a result of the civil unrest in the country that started a few months ago.
However, hundreds of Witnesses have been evacuated from the affected areas of eastern Ukraine.
Those displaced are taking refuge with fellow worshippers.
Despite ongoing violence, the Witnesses in Ukraine continue sharing the Bible’s comforting message with their neighbors.
During the first half of June 2014, the Witnesses hosted several large, peaceful gatherings in eastern Ukraine, which included Bible-based talks and demonstrations of how to apply the Bible’s advice in everyday situations.
Over 5,200 were in attendance.
The Witnesses will host some 40 regional conventions in Ukraine and Crimea, which will highlight Biblical statements about a peaceful future under God’s Kingdom.
More than 165,000 are expected to attend these events, including 7,500 in Crimea.
Witnesses Participate in the 2014 Mexico City Books and Magazines Expo
MEXICO CITY Jehovah’s Witnesses were among 150 publishing houses sharing in the first Expo Publica Book Fair, coordinated by the National Chamber for the Mexican Publishing Industry (CANIEM).
The expo, held at the World Trade Center in Mexico City from April 25 to May 4, 2014, marked the 50th anniversary of CANIEM.
Approximately 20,000 people attended the event.
The Witnesses showcased their wide variety of Bible-based books, magazines, and videos.
They also featured their official website, www.jw.org, where downloadable versions of their publications are available in over 650 languages.
Visitors selected more than 1,600 pieces of literature from the Witnesses, and some requested a personal visit in their home.
As is standard practice for Jehovah’s Witnesses, all of the literature as well as their in-home Bible study arrangement was made available to expo attendees free of charge.
Gamaliel Camarillo, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Mexico, states: "We were pleased that so many people approached our stand at the expo, expressing interest in the Bible and our website, jw.org.
We consider it a public service to make these practical resources freely available to busy people at their request.
For us, our participation in the expo was a huge success. "
Witnesses Launch International Conventions
NEW YORK The first of the three-day "Keep Seeking First God’s Kingdom! " international conventions of Jehovah’s Witnesses will begin on Friday morning, June 6, 2014, at Ford Field in Detroit, Michigan, USA.
Portions of this program will be broadcast to other venues in Arizona, California, Florida, Illinois, Missouri, New Jersey, and North Carolina, and will be translated into Albanian, Korean, Polish, and Portuguese.
J. R. Brown, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses at their world headquarters in Brooklyn, New York, comments: "Over the last three weeks, Witnesses in Detroit and the cities that will be connected by video streaming have been personally inviting their neighbors to attend this remarkable event.
In Detroit, we expect a diverse crowd of some 45,000, including over 2,000 foreign delegates visiting from Australia, Canada, Germany, and Taiwan. "
Throughout the summer, the Witnesses in the United States will host 16 international conventions in large stadiums in a total of ten different states.
At certain locations the program will be presented, in whole or in part, in Albanian, American Sign Language, Arabic, Armenian, Cantonese, Chuukese, French, Greek, Haitian Creole, Hindi, Iloko, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Mandarin, Marshallese, Persian, Polish, Romanian, Russian, Samoan, Spanish, Tagalog, Twi, and Vietnamese.
Beginning in June 2014 and continuing into 2015, the Witnesses will host international conventions in Australia, Ecuador, England, Germany, Greece, Mexico, South Korea, and Zimbabwe.
Jehovah’s Witnesses Announce International Convention Series
NEW YORK Jehovah’s Witnesses have announced that they will hold three-day international conventions in cities around the world beginning in June 2014 and continuing through January 2015.
The convention series will commence in the United States and then continue in Australia, Ecuador, England, Germany, Greece, Mexico, South Korea, and Zimbabwe.
These international events will coincide with the regional conventions held in smaller venues the Witnesses organize every year.
The international convention series will begin on June 6, 2014, at Ford Field in Detroit, Michigan, USA.
Some 45,500 people are expected to attend the event, including 2,500 foreign delegates.
The international conventions will host delegates from other countries and some will also host visiting missionaries.
J. R. Brown, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses at their world headquarters in Brooklyn, New York, comments: "Our international conventions are thrilling and festive occasions to attend.
We think the public will also enjoy these events with us as we gather together as families and friends for what promises to be an exceptional series of programs. "
The theme of the convention series is "Keep Seeking First God’s Kingdom! "
Mr. Brown explains that "the program will highlight a central theme of the Bible and two core beliefs of Jehovah’s Witnesses: that God’s Kingdom was established in 1914 and that Jesus Christ is the King of that Kingdom.
Really, the convention marks the centennial of God’s Kingdom. "
The Witnesses are preparing for an international campaign to invite their neighbors to attend a convention in their area.
As is true with all of the Witnesses’ meetings, there will be no admission fee nor will collections be taken.
Exact dates and locations of the 2014 "Keep Seeking First God’s Kingdom! "
Conventions are available on the official website of Jehovah’s Witnesses, jw.org.
Journalists may contact the branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses for the name of a local convention media contact and other resources for news coverage of the convention.
Storms Ravage Central and Southern United States
Beginning April 27, 2014, a severe storm system caused deadly tornadoes to blast through the central and southern United States.
The tornadoes demolished homes, and reports state that over 30 people were killed.
The United States branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses reports that no Witnesses were killed or injured during the disaster, but seven homes sustained damage.
Additionally, three places of worship used by the Witnesses were damaged.
Committees of Witness volunteers in the region are assisting those affected by the tornadoes.
Destructive Fire in Valparaíso, Chile
PUENTE ALTO, Chile On April 13, 2014, a wildfire fueled by strong Pacific winds swept through the historic port city of Valparaíso, Chile.
The blaze killed at least 15 people and injured 500 others.
Some 2,900 homes were completely destroyed, and over 10,000 people have been displaced.
The branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Chile reports that one elderly male Witness was among the fatalities.
Further, some 89 Witnesses have lost their homes.
Many of those displaced have received shelter in the homes of fellow worshippers.
The branch office immediately formed a disaster relief committee that is providing assistance to the victims.
Organized teams of volunteers have already begun the cleanup.
When conditions permit, they will begin reconstructing the estimated 28 homes of fellow Witnesses that were damaged by the fire.
Jason D. Reed, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Chile, comments: "We are saddened to hear of the suffering of our neighbors that resulted from this wildfire.
We mourn the loss of our fellow worshipper, and we keep those who have lost friends or family members in our prayers.
We will continue to support the victims with relief aid and whatever else is needed to help them cope with the traumatic aftermath of this disaster. "
Earthquakes in Nicaragua
On Monday, April 14, 2014, a magnitude-5.1 earthquake hit just northwest of Managua, Nicaragua.
This was the latest in a string of earthquakes in the region over the previous four days; the largest of the quakes registered 6.6 on the Richter scale.
The Central America branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Mexico confirmed that no Witnesses were injured.
A total of 7 homes of the Witnesses were destroyed and 21 sustained severe damage.
One Kingdom Hall, a place of worship for Jehovah’s Witnesses, in the town of Nagarote was also severely damaged.
As a result, two congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses met together in the parking lot of the Kingdom Hall for the annual observance of the death of Jesus Christ.
Over 530 attended that evening, including many non-Witnesses.
The branch office is providing assistance and temporary shelter for fellow believers with damaged homes.
Richard Rudolph, Concentration Camp Survivor, Dies in Germany at 102
SELTERS, Germany Richard Rudolph, one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, who survived five Nazi concentration camps and endured imprisonment under Communist rule, died on January 31, 2014.
He was 102 years old.
After the Nazis rose to power in 1933, the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses was outlawed in much of Germany.
As a result, a total of 11,300 Witnesses were imprisoned by the Nazis, 4,200 of them in concentration camps, including Mr. Rudolph.
Some 1,500 lost their lives.
Under the Nazi regime, Mr. Rudolph spent nine years in imprisonment and survived five concentration camps, including the notorious Sachsenhausen and Neuengamme camps, where over 300,000 people were imprisoned and as many as 140,000 died.
Richard Rudolph (on roof, far right) was one of the prisoners forced to construct the Neuengamme concentration camp in 1940.
In 1944, Mr. Rudolph was transferred to the Neuengamme satellite camp, Salzgitter-Watenstedt.
His religious convictions prohibited him from doing any work associated with ammunition production and, as a result, he was threatened with execution.
However, a friendly SS officer, impressed by Rudolph’s religious convictions, hid Mr. Rudolph in a food-supply truck, which enabled him to avoid execution.
After World War II, Rudolph continued his religious activity as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Soviet Occupation Zone, which later became the German Democratic Republic (GDR).
He was again arrested in 1950 and sentenced to prison.
In total, he was incarcerated for over 19 years for his religious beliefs.
Ann-Jacqueline Frieser and Richard Rudolph, whose biography was the subject of her award-winning article in 2009.
For decades, Richard Rudolph made it his aim to share the Bible’s message with others and to share lessons he learned from the past about the harmful effects of discrimination.
In 2009, a German student, Ann-Jacqueline Frieser, won two awards in the Federal President’s History Competition entitled "Heroes: Honored – Misunderstood – Forgotten " for her biography and interview of Richard Rudolph.
She was awarded first place in the state of Rheinland-Palatinate and was among the top three students who won the Federal award.
Wolfram Slupina, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Germany, states: "Richard Rudolph was not only a dear friend and fellow worshiper but also an invaluable historical resource.
His life of remarkable faith and courage is an example for all of us. "
Devastating Mudslide in Washington State
A mile-wide mudslide buried homes in Snohomish County, Washington, USA on March 22, 2014.
Local officials state that up to 90 people are still missing and 17 people have been confirmed dead.
The United States branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses reports that one female Witness is among the missing.
One Witness couple lost both their daughter and great-granddaughter in the mudslide.
Two Witnesses had to evacuate their homes; the home of another Witness was completely destroyed.
Local Witness elders are providing comfort and support to those affected by the disaster.
Guy H. Pierce, Member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses, Dies
NEW YORK Guy H. Pierce, a member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses at their world headquarters in Brooklyn, New York, died on Tuesday, March 18. He was 79 years of age.
Mr. Pierce served on various committees that supervise activities related to the Witnesses and their international Bible-education work.
His organizational responsibilities required that he travel extensively, and he used these occasions to provide encouragement for Jehovah’s Witnesses throughout the world.
Despite his workload, he was well-known for never being too busy to listen to those needing assistance or advice, and he put others at ease with his warm smile and good sense of humor.
His closest associates noted that people from different backgrounds or cultures were naturally drawn to him.
In a discourse at a graduation program for full-time ministers, Mr. Pierce made remarks that he was known to exemplify: "Be firm for right principles, but be flexible.
Do not look down on those in your assignment because their culture is different. "
Guy Hollis Pierce was born in Auburn, California, on November 6, 1934.
He was baptized as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses on August 14, 1955, at the age of 20.
He married a fellow Witness, Penelope (Penny) Wong, on May 30, 1977, and the two raised a family together.
Mr. and Mrs. Pierce became full-time Bible instructors (referred to by Witnesses as regular pioneers).
Later, he became a traveling minister of Jehovah’s Witnesses, visiting congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses throughout the United States to provide spiritual encouragement to other full-time Bible instructors and local congregation members.
In 1997, the Pierces were invited to work full-time at the United States branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
On October 2, 1999, Mr. Pierce was announced as a new member of the Governing Body.
Mr. Pierce was the chairman for the 129th annual meeting of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania, on the weekend of October 5 and 6, 2013.
A total audience of 1,413,676 in 31 countries attended the event either in person or via webcast.
According to the Witnesses’ official website, this was the largest gathering of Jehovah’s Witnesses to date.
In addition to his wife, Penny, Mr. Pierce is survived by his six children, several grandchildren, and great-grandchildren.
He will also be fondly remembered by Jehovah’s Witnesses around the world whom he regarded as family.
In a statement, his fellow members of the Governing Body commented on "his solid faith and firm stand for Jehovah’s laws and principles, " adding: "Our memories of his courageous and faithful earthly life course will continue to strengthen us for years to come. "
Jehovah’s Witnesses to Launch Global Invitation Campaign for the Memorial of Christ’s Death
NEW YORK On Saturday, March 22, 2014, Jehovah’s Witnesses will launch a global campaign inviting the public to an event the Witnesses consider to be the most important of the year: the Memorial of Christ’s death.
Last year, there were 19,241,252 that gathered for this special observance.
The Witnesses hope to reach a new all-time peak in attendance for this year’s Memorial, which will be held on Monday, April 14, after sundown.
"We are sure that all who attend the Memorial with us will enjoy this occasion and benefit from it, " states J. R. Brown, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses at their world headquarters in New York.
"That prospect is motivating us to invite as many as possible to join us for this sacred event. "
Guy H. Pierce, Member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses, Dies at 79
Guy H. Pierce, a member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses at their world headquarters in Brooklyn, New York, died on Tuesday, March 18. He was 79 years of age.
He is also fondly remembered by Jehovah’s Witnesses around the world whom he regarded as family.
In a statement, his fellow members of the Governing Body commented: "Our memories of his courageous and faithful earthly life course will continue to strengthen us for years to come. "
Jehovah’s Witnesses Release Newly Revised Bible in a Large-Size Edition
NEW YORK In their ongoing efforts to make the Bible accessible to as many people as possible, Jehovah’s Witnesses are releasing a large-size edition of the revised New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures.
This edition, which is being printed in the United States and Japan, is scheduled to have a combined initial printing of 424,000 copies.
The Witnesses released the regular-size revised New World Translation during a special meeting that was broadcast on October 5-6, 2013, to 31 countries.
The 2013 revision represents the most comprehensive update of the translation since 1984. On October 7, 2013, the Witnesses made this translation of the Bible available in a multiplatform app, JW Library, which has already had close to 1.4 million downloads.
The revised New World Translation is also available in a variety of electronic formats online at www.jw.org.
The revised New World Translation in all formats includes nearly 60,000 marginal references, which help readers to understand better the context of Bible accounts.
Also included are full-color diagrams, maps of Biblical lands, and charts illustrating details of daily life during Bible times.
An appendix explains such topics as the principles of Bible translation and the history of how the Bible was written and preserved.
The 1984 edition of the New World Translation already included God’s personal name some 7,000 times in the text.
However, the 2013 revision also reflects current research on where the name of God appears in the oldest Bible manuscripts.
Based on further examination of the Dead Sea Scrolls and other ancient manuscripts, the revised New World Translation includes six additional occurrences of the divine name.
They are found at Judges 19:18; 1 Samuel 2:25; 6:3; 10:26; 23:14; 23:16.
An appendix further discusses the use of the divine name in ancient Hebrew and Greek, as well as its appearance in Bible translations in several modern dialects and languages.
The Witnesses have a long history of printing, distributing, and translating the New World Translation, which has been well-regarded by scholars for its accuracy.
The complete text of this translation was first made available in English in 1961.
In 1963, The New York Times reported that the New World Translation would be available in six additional languages, as announced at a Witness convention held at Yankee Stadium.
Since then, the Witnesses have provided this translation in over 120 languages.
In recent years, the New World Bible Translation Committee chose to revise the New World Translation to respond to changes in modern language and to clarify certain Biblical expressions, thus enhancing readability and understanding.
The revised New World Translation embodies these latest advances in Bible translation.
"It was thrilling to receive the first editions of the New World Translation over 50 years ago, and it is even more thrilling to have the latest revised edition, " states J. R. Brown, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses at their world headquarters.
"Our intent is to make the Holy Scriptures understandable to all, using language that is accurate, dignified, and contemporary. "
Expanded Coverage: Attempt to Ban JW.ORG Fails
PETERSBURG, Russia Jehovah’s Witnesses won a major court victory on January 22, 2014, when an appellate court reversed a lower court’s ruling that banned jw.org, the official website of Jehovah’s Witnesses, throughout Russia.
The Tver Regional Court overturned the August 7, 2013, decision of the Tsentralniy District Court.
The regional court determined that the district court was unjustified in banning the website because Jehovah’s Witnesses, the owners, had not been given an opportunity to participate in the hearing.
The local prosecutor in Tver brought the case to court because jw.org contained publications that Russian courts have ruled to be "extremist. "
As soon as Jehovah’s Witnesses learned of the district court’s ruling, they removed these publications from jw.org in Russia.
The Tver Regional Court confirmed that the Witnesses were in compliance with Russian laws and rescinded the ban.
Jehovah’s Witnesses are contesting the rulings by the Russian courts that have declared some of their publications to be "extremist " and have submitted several applications to the European Court of Human Rights to reverse these decisions.
Grigory Martynov, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Russia, states: "We are pleased that the judges saw the benefits of our website and the reasonableness of our efforts to comply with Russian court decisions.
We will continue to defend the integrity of our publications and the rights of Russian citizens to benefit fully from our Bible education work. "
"Witnesses around the world are rejoicing at this victory, " states J. R. Brown, a spokesman at the Witnesses’ world headquarters.
"Thanks to this legal victory, all citizens of Russia will continue to have access to this excellent Bible-education website. "
Update: After Super Typhoon Haiyan, Jehovah’s Witnesses Mobilize Relief Effort
MANILA, Philippines In response to the massive devastation caused by Super Typhoon Haiyan, Jehovah’s Witnesses have organized an ongoing global relief effort for the Philippines.
The branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Manila formed five disaster relief committees to expedite assistance to victims.
More than 190 tons of supplies have been sent to the central Philippines.
Witnesses from at least ten countries offered to assist with the relief effort.
Volunteers are helping to rebuild and repair over 2,000 homes or provide medical support.
As many as 225 people are still living in tents set up by the Witnesses at a relocation site near Calbayog City, Samar.
An estimated 15 to 20 percent of those seeking refuge at the site are non-Witnesses.
In the aftermath of what has proved to be one of the most powerful storms to ever make landfall, the death toll has risen to 6,201 and 1,785 people are still missing.
Some 28,000 people were injured and over 1 million homes were damaged.
The Philippines branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Manila now confirms that 33 Witnesses have died and 10 are missing and presumed dead.
Mark Sanderson, a member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses, visits disaster victims.
Beginning on December 7, 2013, Mark Sanderson, a member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses, visited five provinces in the affected region over the course of seven days.
He states: "The tragic results of Typhoon Haiyan are still deeply affecting many in the Philippines; yet we are prepared to continue providing the needed supplies, manpower, and comfort to help the victims recover. "
Russian Officials Seek Court Ruling to Ban Popular Bible-Education Website
PETERSBURG, Russia On August 7, 2013, the Tsentralniy District Court of the city of Tver, located 100 mi (approx. 160 km) north of Moscow, ruled that the Bible-education website jw.org should be banned throughout the Russian Federation.
Although jw.org is consulted by hundreds of thousands around the world and is highly regarded by researchers, the court sided with officials seeking to ban the popular website.
The court rendered its decision without notifying or taking any testimony from the publishers of the site, the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York.
Jehovah’s Witnesses are appealing the decision to the Tver Regional Court.
The appeal is scheduled to be heard on January 22, 2014.
If the appeal is denied, the website will no longer be available to the over 160,000 Jehovah’s Witnesses in Russia, who regularly use the website for religious services and in personal and family Bible study.
Promoting the website will then become a criminal act in Russia.
Additionally, some 142 million people living in Russia will be restricted from consulting jw.org for free information about the Bible.
Commenting on the website, Yekaterina Elbakyan, Doctor of Philosophy and expert in religious studies who serves as a professor at the Academy of Labor and Social Relations in Moscow, says that jw.org is "a gift for anybody who is engaged in religious research.
It provides comprehensive and understandable material.
Significant spiritual and moral issues are presented in a simple way.
When you use the website, you feel like you are being openly welcomed into the home of Jehovah’s Witnesses. "
Speaking from St. Petersburg, Grigory Martynov, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Russia, states: "The jw.org website is a wonderful tool for those in our country searching for information about the Bible and is not politically or commercially affiliated in any way.
We hope that the Tver Regional Court will ensure that this popular educational resource remains available for all Russians. "
J. R. Brown, a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses at their world headquarters in New York, comments: "The jw.org website is valued both as a research tool and as a trusted information source for families all over the world.
It is so valued that an average of 900,000 people visit the site every day to access positive information available in some 600 languages.
Censoring this material is clearly unwarranted. "
Armenia Releases Conscientious Objectors
On November 12, 2013, Armenia released all remaining Jehovah’s Witnesses imprisoned for conscientious objection.
This video outlines how a historic legal case culminated in the release of these Witnesses.
New Sign-Language App Available!
The new app JW Library Sign Language allows you to download and play sign-language videos from jw.org.
You can watch them even when you are not connected to the Internet.
The app features colorful images, simple navigation, and easy-to-use controls.
The app is available for iPad®, iPhone®, and iPod touch®, as well as devices running Android™ 3.0 and later.
In the future, a Windows 8 version will be released.
Armenia Ordered to Pay Damages to 17 Jehovah’s Witnesses
STRASBOURG, France On November 27, 2012, the European Court of Human Rights ruled that the government of Armenia must pay 112,000 euros ($145,226) in damages and legal fees to 17 conscientious objectors for human rights violations.
In 2005, 17 young men who are Jehovah’s Witnesses were performing alternative civilian service.
However, when they realized that it was under the control and supervision of the military, they could no longer continue to serve in good conscience and subsequently left their places of service.
They were thereafter arrested and prosecuted.
Some were held in pretrial detention for several months, and 11 were eventually sentenced to prison terms from two to three years.
The European Court ruled that these criminal prosecutions and detentions were illegal because in 2005, there was no law in Armenia that made it a crime to abandon alternative civilian service.
The Court held that Armenia violated the Witnesses’ right to liberty and security as protected under Article 5 of the European Convention on Human Rights.
Although the government later dropped the criminal charges against the 17, Armenia refused to compensate them for the unlawful criminal prosecutions and detentions.
Therefore, the Court ordered Armenia to pay compensation for moral damages and legal fees.
This judgment comes in the wake of three other European Court rulings against Armenia on the issue of neutrality.
In all four cases, the Armenian authorities mistreated conscientious objectors who are Jehovah’s Witnesses and unjustly dealt with them as if they were dangerous criminals.
"The judgment rendered by the European Court helps to rectify the injustices suffered by these Jehovah’s Witnesses, " states André Carbonneau, an attorney for the applicants.
"This line of victories against Armenia in the European Court sends an unmistakable message to other countries within the Council of Europe as well as countries such as Eritrea, South Korea, and countries in Central Asia regarding the right of Jehovah’s Witnesses to refuse military service. "
Bushfires Rage On in Australia
Bushfires continue to intensify following the hottest and driest year on record in Australia.
Since September 2019, numerous catastrophic fires have plagued every Australian state in what is just the beginning of a historic fire season.
The coastal and southeastern regions, Victoria and New South Wales, are the worst hit.
There have been no reports of deaths or injuries among our brothers, but there has been a significant loss of property, including nine homes that were completely destroyed.
To date, more than 700 brothers have been evacuated.
Many Witness families have decided to leave the affected areas because of record-setting smoke levels, which have been described by some as a public health emergency.
Most of those evacuated have chosen to stay with family, friends, or publishers from surrounding congregations, which are not in the direct path of the fires.
The Australasia branch has formed two Disaster Relief Committees to provide spiritual and material help.
Two circuit overseers and members of the Branch Committee are shepherding and encouraging our brothers in the affected regions.
Even though most of the brothers and sisters affected by the fires are exhausted, both physically and emotionally, many have expressed sincere gratitude for the genuine Christian love that our brothers continue to display.
1 Peter 2:17.
Special Campaign Reaches Rural Areas in Brazil
Tens of thousands of Jehovah’s Witnesses are making a special effort to share the Bible’s message with people living in rural areas of Brazil.
This special preaching campaign began on September 1, 2018, and will continue until December 31, 2019.
To date, more than 80,000 publishers have participated, and more than 16,000 Bible studies have been started.
Brazil is the world’s fifth largest country.
It is estimated that some 28 million people live in the rural areas.
An additional 22 million people live in isolated towns and villages.
The special campaign has already reached over 1,600 territories.
Some publishers have had to travel more than 2,000 kilometers (1,243 mi) to reach people.
One publisher arrived at a house where an elderly man was processing coffee that he had harvested.
The man invited the publisher inside his house and called to his wife, saying: "He came to talk about the Bible with us.
Let’s listen! "
The man and his wife began asking questions.
They inquired about the condition of the dead, why God allows suffering, whether it is right to pay tithes, how to solve family problems, and many other topics.
Impressed by the publisher’s Bible-based answers, the man explained that he had been praying that morning, asking God if his many questions would ever be answered.
The family attended their first meeting that same evening, and they are continuing to study the Bible.
In another area, publishers were working from house to house when heavy rain forced them to take shelter in a public health clinic.
While there, they asked a woman and her daughter what questions they would like to ask God.
The daughter said that she would love to see her late grandmother again.
The publishers shared with them scriptures regarding the resurrection and showed the video entitled The Resurrection Soon a Reality.
Later, when the publishers visited the woman’s home, they were able to start a Bible study with her and her family.
The woman and her daughters attended a meeting in a nearby city and are continuing their study over the telephone.
The Bible foretells that the Kingdom of God will have subjects "to the ends of the earth. "
The special campaign in rural Brazil reflects Jehovah’s will to see that prophecy fulfilled.
Psalm 72:8.
Major Flooding in Togo
Heavy and prolonged rainfall in Togo during the 2019 rainy season has led to significant flooding on the outskirts of Lomé, Togo.
Two hundred and fifty-seven publishers from seven different congregations have been affected.
Relief efforts are underway.
In some of the affected areas, water levels in buildings reached up to one meter (3 ft 3 in), forcing 51 of our brothers and sisters to evacuate their homes.
Publishers nearby have opened their homes to care for the needs of those displaced.
Floodwaters contaminated some of the water sources in the area.
The Benin Branch Committee, which oversees the work in Togo, has arranged to distribute necessary relief supplies through the circuit overseer and local elders.
These supplies include water purification tablets, disinfectant, and bleach.
We pray for Jehovah’s blessing on our brothers in Togo as they demonstrate self-sacrificing love for one another.
John 13:34, 35.
New World Translation Released in Nzema Language
After four years of translation work, the complete New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures was released in the Nzema language on November 22, 2019, at a regional convention in Bawia, Western Region, Ghana.
Brother Samuel M. Kwesie, a member of the Ghana Branch Committee, released the Bible before an audience of 3,051.
A team of seven translators worked on the project.
One of the translators stated: "The New World Translation uses simple language, making it understandable to all readers, including young people.
This will surely draw readers closer to their heavenly Father, Jehovah. "
Previously, Nzema-speaking publishers had been using a Bible published by the Bible Society of Ghana.
However, this translation omits God’s name and is difficult to understand.
Additionally, because Bibles are expensive in Ghana, it made it difficult for some publishers to afford one.
In contrast, the Nzema-language New World Translation contains God’s name, Jehovah, is written in clear language, and provided without cost.
This Bible will benefit the 1,532 Nzema-speaking publishers in the Ghana branch territory as they preach to the some 330,000 people who speak the language.
May our brothers find delight "in the law of Jehovah " with this new Bible translation.
Psalm 1:1, 2.
School Shooting in California, United States
POn November 14, 2019, a student opened fire on fellow classmates at a high school in Santa Clarita, California.
The gunman killed two students and wounded three, before shooting himself.
Sadly, Dominic Blackwell, the son of one of our sisters, was one of the students killed.
He was 14 years old and regularly attended meetings with his mother, Sister Nancy Blackwell.
Dominic is survived by his parents and three younger siblings.
The elders are providing Scriptural comfort and support to the family and the local congregation.
We are deeply saddened to hear about this tragedy.
We long for the time when God will "wipe out every tear . . . , and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. "
Heavy Rainstorms Strike Rwanda
Widespread heavy rainstorms struck northern Rwanda on October 26 and 29, 2019, affecting several families of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Tragically, the 13-year-old daughter of a Witness couple in the Musanze District of the Northern Province was swept away in the floodwaters and died.
In the Ngororero District of the Western Province, one Witness family suffered the destruction of their home and nine families lost their crops.
The Rwanda branch office is coordinating relief efforts in the region, including material aid and spiritual assistance.
We pray that Jehovah will comfort the hearts of our brothers who are suffering from this tragedy.
2 Thessalonians 2:16, 17.
Special Campaign for Arabic-Speaking People in Austria and Germany
From August 31 to October 26, 2019, brothers and sisters from 19 countries participated in an Arabic Bible education initiative in Austria and Germany.
During the course of the special campaign, the 1,782 participants spent a total of 40,724 hours in the education work, showed our videos 4,483 times, and placed 24,769 pieces of Bible literature.
Over the past few years, more than one million refugees have entered Austria and Germany, the majority from Arabic-speaking countries.
Many of these refugees have never heard the Bible’s comforting message.
Visiting brothers and sisters from Canada, the United States, and various countries in Europe supported the 1,108 publishers in Austria and Germany who serve in the Arabic field.
Together they visited 24 regions, including major cities like Berlin, Cologne, Dresden, Frankfurt, Graz, Hamburg, and Vienna.
One local brother wrote: "The campaign had such a positive impact on us, one we would never have imagined.
The visiting brothers have invigorated us, and we are so grateful for their help.
We very much appreciated the privilege to participate in this special campaign. "
After attending a meeting of Jehovah’s Witnesses, a young man from an Arabic-speaking country approached a brother and asked with excitement: "Do you know what mahabba means in German? "
The brother responded, "Liebe (love)! "
"Yes, " said the young man, "that’s what I saw here in action today!
You were so kind to me.
Everyone greeted me and shook my hand.
I saw people from different countries who treated each other with respect.
If everyone would act this way, the whole world would be different, that’s for sure! "
Another man stated about Jehovah’s Witnesses: "You have become skilled in your interactions with people, and you have built one of the best communities in the world. "
A couple from an Arabic-speaking country who have lived in Germany for about a year invited brothers to their home for tea.
After the brothers explained the purpose of their visit, the wife asked, "Are you Jehovah’s Witnesses? "
When the brothers confirmed this, the wife replied: "Unbelievable!
I’ve been looking for you for months.
I even went to the main train station to look for you.
And here you are. You came to me!
It is God who sent you. "
Jehovah greatly blessed the zeal of the brothers and sisters who took part in this special campaign to share the Bible’s message of hope with "people of all the nations. "
Matthew 28:19.
Russian Court Orders Brother Klimov to Six Years in Prison, Harshest Sentence Issued Since 2017 Ban
On November 5, 2019, the Oktyabrsky District Court of Tomsk sentenced Brother Sergey Klimov to six years in prison.
Dennis Christensen is the only other brother in Russia to have received a sentence of this length.
However, in Brother Klimov’s case, the court imposed several additional restrictions, making his the harshest sentence imposed on one of our brothers since the 2017 Supreme Court ban.
Brother Klimov was arrested on June 3, 2018, after law enforcement, including special forces, invaded two homes of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Some 30 brothers and sisters, including an 83-year-old sister, were taken away for questioning.
All but Brother Klimov were released.
Criminal charges were brought against him, and a court ordered that he be placed in pretrial detention for two months.
His term was extended seven times, meaning that even before beginning his six-year prison sentence, he has been incarcerated separated from his wife and family for a year and five months.
Lawyers for Brother Klimov will appeal his conviction.
Additionally, on August 20, 2018, the complaint Klimov v. Russia was filed with the European Court of Human Rights regarding his pretrial detention.
Throughout 2019, we have seen an increase in raids, arrests, and detentions in Russia.
Yet, our brothers remain undeterred.
We are encouraged by the evidence that Jehovah is blessing our brothers’ full confidence in him.
Psalm 56:1-5, 9.
Severe Flooding Causes Devastation in Eastern Spain
Several rounds of heavy rain caused widespread destruction in eastern Spain during the months of September and October 2019.
The most serious of these occurred on October 23 in the province of Tarragona when the Francolí River turned into a raging flood.
Sadly, five people lost their lives in this flood.
Among these were two of our brothers who were crossing a bridge on the way home from a congregation meeting when their car was suddenly swept away.
The elders are comforting the local congregation as they mourn this tragedy.
A member of the Spain Branch Committee has visited the congregation to provide additional shepherding.
We pray that Jehovah continues to comfort our brothers and sisters during this trial.
2 Corinthians 1:3, 4.
2019 Annual Meeting Summary
On Saturday, October 5, 2019, the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania held its annual business meeting at the Assembly Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Newburgh, New York, U.S.A. After the business meeting, the Governing Body presented an upbuilding spiritual program to an audience of 20,679, including those at tied-in venues.
The following is a summary of each part.
"Your Leader Is One, the Christ "
Brother Gerrit Lösch, who served as the chairman for the program, delivered the opening talk based on Matthew 23:10, reminding us that Jesus Christ is our leader, not any man.
Our Relief Ministry, Used by Jehovah to Provide Relief
Brother Stephen Lett explained the importance of being cheerful givers.
One area in which we can show ourselves to be generous is by supporting our relief ministry.
Brother Lett provided a summary of the damage caused by natural disasters and our subsequent relief work during the 2018 and 2019 service years.
Over 900,000 brothers and sisters were affected by such disasters; more than 700 Kingdom Halls and 15,000 homes of our brothers were damaged or destroyed.
Jehovah’s Witnesses spent $49.5 million on relief efforts.
This part included videos that contained heartfelt expressions of appreciation from publishers who benefited from our relief ministry.
‘The Good Hand of Our God Is Upon Us . . .
Let Us Get Up and Build’ | Video
This video explained that Jehovah’s Witnesses care for almost 80,000 buildings worldwide.
It also highlighted the strategies we employ to maintain, renovate, and construct theocratic facilities.
A Historic Look at Property Acquisitions | Video
This recording included archived interviews of three brothers who assisted in the past with selecting and purchasing properties for the United States branch and world headquarters: Brothers Max Larson, George Couch, and Gilbert Nazaroff.
All three of these brothers related how they saw clear evidence of Jehovah’s hand in the acquisition of various properties.
A New Construction Project Is Being Planned | Video
This video announced that Jehovah’s Witnesses plan to consolidate media production into a new facility to be constructed in Ramapo, New York.
The property is located approximately two miles (3 km) from world headquarters in Warwick, New York.
The goal is to begin construction in 2022 and complete it by December 2026.
During the peak of construction, the project will require an estimated 1,500 volunteers per day.
A rendering of the new Bethel facility to be constructed in Ramapo, New York.
The design includes studio space, offices, residences, and a visitor center
A New Application for Processing Applications | Video
This video explained that beginning January 2020, publishers interested in expanding their ministry will be able to fill out applications on jw.org and submit them to their body of elders for review.
A New Way to Access JW.ORG Audio Files
Select audio content on jw.org may now be accessed via Amazon Alexa or Google Assistant.
An Attack Coming From the North
Brother David Splane clarified our understanding of the prophecy recorded in Joel chapter 2 describing a swarm of locusts.
We look forward to studying this clarified understanding when it appears in The Watchtower.
The New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures (Study Edition) from Matthew through Acts
Study the Bible With the Study Bible
Brother Samuel Herd highlighted the benefits of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures (Study Edition) that can be accessed online.
He then released the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures (Study Edition) from the books of Matthew through Acts in print form.
Publishers may request a copy through their local congregation.
We Have Work to Do!
Brother Anthony Morris emphasized that for true Christians, preaching the good news is our paramount assignment.
Theocratic facilities support the Governing Body in organizing the preaching work and in providing spiritual food to Jehovah’s people.
Brother Morris quoted the stirring words from the November 15, 1976, issue of The Watchtower: "The arrival of the ‘great tribulation’ should find the preaching work at the height of its forward movement, at the very peak of its momentum throughout the earth.
The arrival of the Lord Jesus to execute judgment will come as a complete surprise even to Jehovah’s people, for it will no doubt find them at their busiest time of activity! "
What Do We Have to Fear?
Brother Mark Sanderson explained that, as Jesus prophesied, God’s people expect to be hated by "all the nations. "
(Matthew 24:9) However, Brother Sanderson encouraged us to fear, not humans, but Jehovah.
Psalm 111:10.
A touching video was presented of persecuted brothers and sisters in Russia expressing how they overcame their fear of persecution.
This talk and video encouraged all of Jehovah's people to develop that same spirit.
Are You Completely Sober?
Brother Geoffrey Jackson made practical application of texts in the Christian Greek Scriptures that use a term that literally means "sober. "
He also stressed the importance of continuing to ‘keep our senses completely’ (literally "being sober perfectly ") during these last days.
1 Peter 1:13.
Will You Care for It?
Brother Kenneth Cook announced the yeartext for 2020, Matthew 28:19: "Go, therefore, and make disciples . . . , baptizing them. "
He emphasized the need to help those who have the right heart condition to dedicate their lives to Jehovah and be baptized.
Spiritual programs like the annual meeting motivate us to continue exerting ourselves in our service to Jehovah.
Typhoon Tapah Hits Southern Japan
From September 21 to 23, 2019, Typhoon Tapah struck southern Japan with powerful winds and rain.
The storm caused flight cancellations, railway suspensions, and left over 30,000 homes without electricity.
In Okinawa and Kyushu, more than 50 people were injured.
The Japan branch office reports that five publishers were injured, including one sister who was hospitalized.
Over 50 homes of our brothers sustained damage.
A Disaster Relief Committee and responsible brothers are responding to the immediate physical and spiritual needs of the affected publishers.
The Japan branch will continue to monitor the effects of this typhoon and provide needed support.
We pray that our brothers in Japan continue to rely on Jehovah for comfort during this trial.
Tajik Authorities Unjustly Sentence 68-Year-Old Brother Shamil Khakimov to Seven and a Half Years in Prison
On September 10, 2019, the Khujand City Court in Tajikistan sentenced Brother Shamil Khakimov to seven and a half years in prison for merely sharing his religious beliefs with others.
Jehovah’s Witnesses are appealing this case.
Brother Khakimov’s ordeal began in early 2019.
On February 26, authorities arrested 68-year-old Shamil, charging him with "inciting religious hatred. "
Afterward, the court placed him in pretrial detention, which eventually was extended for six months.
In addition to dealing with this unjust prison term, Brother Khakimov suffers from high blood pressure and is still recovering from a medical procedure.
This is the first time one of Jehovah’s Witnesses has been imprisoned in Tajikistan since 2017, when 18-year-old Daniil Islamov was given a six-month prison sentence for refusing to wear a military uniform.
Tajikistan is now one of five countries that have imprisoned at least one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
The other four are Eritrea, Russia, Singapore, and Turkmenistan.
We pray that Jehovah will continue to supply Brother Khakimov everything that he needs to endure this trial.
Romans 15:5.
Christian Neutrality in South Korea​ History of Faith and Courage
Since 1953, young Korean brothers have been imprisoned for refusing military service.
Altogether, more than 19,000 brothers who refused to compromise their faith have spent a total of 36,000 years in prison.
However, on February 28, 2019, the last of our imprisoned brothers was released.
But how did such a historical occasion come to be?
Let’s take a look at the record of strong faith and unwavering courage among the Korean brothers.
Flooding Hits Western India
According to a media outlet, floods in India have killed at least 169 people in the western states of Gujarat, Maharashtra, Karnataka, and Kerala.
The India branch office reports that none of our brothers and sisters were killed or injured by the flooding.
The branch has provided the following details.
Gujarat: In the city of Vadodara, a total of 145 publishers were affected by the floodwaters.
The Gujarati remote translation office, which is located in Vadodara, was not damaged.
Maharashtra: In Mumbai, the homes of six families were affected.
In the city of Sangli, located some 378 kilometers (235 mi) southeast of Mumbai, 25 publishers were displaced.
Brothers in a nearby city provided temporary accommodations.
Karnataka: Six families were displaced by the floods.
The branch office is located in this state, but it was not affected by the heavy rains or flooding.
Kerala: Some 100 families have moved to higher ground and are temporarily staying with other Witnesses.
A Disaster Relief Committee is assessing the situation.
The branch office is coordinating the relief efforts in the affected areas.
Circuit overseers and Local Design/Construction field personnel have been working hard to evaluate and help our affected brothers and sisters.
This includes providing material support, such as the distribution of basic supplies like potable water, and spiritual encouragement.
We pray that Jehovah will continue to be with our brothers affected by the flooding.
We look forward to the time when natural disasters will be replaced by an "abundance of peace. "
Psalm 37:11.
Warsaw, Poland 2019 "Love Never Fails "!
International Convention
Dates: August 9-11, 2019
Locations: Municipal Stadium of Legia Warsaw and Torwar Hall, Warsaw, Poland
Program Languages: English, Polish
Peak Attendance: 32,069
Total Number Baptized: 190
Number of International Delegates: 6,892
Invited Branches: Central Europe, Chile, Ecuador, Finland, France, Georgia, Hungary, Japan, Korea, Moldova, Romania, Ukraine, United States
Local Experiences: Mr. Kamil Kaźmierkiewicz, general manager of Four Points by Sheraton Warsaw Mokotów (one of the hotels that accommodated delegates), wrote the following: "Cooperation with you is exemplary I wish I would have more guests who are so kind and positive.
The strong connection and unity between the participants is visible. . . .
I take my hat off to the perfect logistics of this event. "
Mr. Kamil Lubański, owner of KL Team, the company contracted to provide bus transportation, also related: "Right from the start of our working together, I could sense a very good atmosphere and working relationship from Jehovah’s Witnesses.
They are very involved and professional.
This very large event was well planned and prepared.
Our company has had the privilege of supporting many prestigious and government events that were organized on a national and European level.
However, it is rare to find a client that is so logistically and methodically prepared.
To summarize, our drivers and coordinators only have positive things to say about working with Jehovah’s Witnesses.
We hope that in the future we will be able to work together again. "
Delegates are warmly welcomed at the airport
Phoenix, United States 2019 "Love Never Fails "!
Location: Chase Field in Phoenix, Arizona, United States
Program Language: English
Peak Attendance: 40,237
Total Number Baptized: 352
Number of International Delegates: 5,000
Invited Branches: Australasia, Britain, Canada, Central Europe, Chile, France, Greece, India, Italy, Korea, Micronesia, Scandinavia, Sri Lanka, Tahiti, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey
Local Experience: Steve Moore, the president and CEO of Visit Phoenix, which helps book conventions, hotels, and resorts in the Phoenix area, commented: "[This convention] is the most professionally organized convention I’ve ever had the pleasure of working with in a very long career.
And on top of that, you promise to clean the stadium before you leave no one else does that. "
International delegates are warmly welcomed as they arrive at Sky Harbor International Airport in Phoenix
Monsoon Rains Hit the Philippines
PIn early August 2019, monsoon weather struck the Philippines with heavy rains and strong winds, causing flooding and landslides.
Sadly, one brother who was serving as a temporary special pioneer was killed by a landslide in Natonin, Mountain Province.
Another brother, who also serves as a temporary special pioneer, sustained minor injuries in the same landslide.
In a separate incident, a ten-year old boy was injured by debris but received appropriate medical care.
None of our brothers’ homes were seriously damaged.
However, one Kingdom Hall in Negros Occidental suffered minor damage from strong winds that caused a portion of the ceiling to fall.
The Philippines branch office and the local circuit overseer are providing spiritual and emotional support to the families of our affected brothers.
We are saddened to hear of this tragic loss and pray for those grieving the death of our brother.
We look forward to the day when painful events will not even "be called to mind. "
Isaiah 65:17.
Earthquakes Rattle Southern California
Since July 4, 2019, powerful earthquakes and aftershocks have struck southern California in the Mojave Desert region.
This includes a 7.1-magnitude quake that is considered to be one of the strongest recorded in this area in the last two decades.
The quakes occurred near the city of Ridgecrest, which is home to 215 publishers.
Thankfully, none of our brothers were seriously injured.
However, three publishers sustained minor injuries, and initial reports indicate that seven publishers are displaced.
Also, 7 homes of our brothers were heavily damaged and 35 sustained minor damage.
Additionally, two Kingdom Halls were lightly damaged.
Two circuit overseers are coordinating the relief efforts in the area.
The circuit overseers and local elders are also shepherding the brothers and sisters affected by the earthquake.
We pray that Jehovah continues to provide our fellow worshippers with the wisdom needed to cope with natural disasters like these.
Proverbs 2:6-8.
High Winds and Flooding Strike South Texas
On June 24, 2019, high winds and heavy rain pounded south Texas.
News reports indicate that hundreds of homes were flooded and more than 100 people were evacuated.
Although no publishers were injured in the storm, 47 were displaced.
Additionally, the storm damaged 65 homes of our brothers and sisters, as well as one apartment attached to a Kingdom Hall.
Circuit overseers and local elders are shepherding those affected by the storm.
Also, a Disaster Relief Committee is coordinating the arrangements for housing and the distribution of food, water, and clothing.
Efforts are already underway to clean and stabilize the damaged homes as well as the Kingdom Hall apartment.
We will continue to support our brothers and sisters in south Texas, as they trust in Jehovah and cope with the aftermath of this severe weather.
Isaiah 26:3, 4.
Berlin, Germany 2019 "Love Never Fails "!
Dates: June 14-16, 2019
Location: Olympic Stadium in Berlin, Germany
Program Languages: English, German, Russian
Peak Attendance: 37,115
Total Number Baptized: 255
Invited Branches: Brazil, Britain, Canada, Ecuador, Finland, Greece, Poland, Scandinavia, Slovenia, United States
Local Experience: Delegates toured the famous Pergamon Museum in Berlin as part of the activities surrounding the convention.
After observing our brothers as they visited the museum, a guard stated: "Many people are hopeless because they do not have any faith.
It’s very obvious, however, that you do have faith and love among yourselves. "
Another guard said: "With visitors like you, time flies by and I’m happy to work overtime. "
Local brothers and sisters welcome delegates at the airport
Release of the Christian Greek Scriptures in Marshallese
On May 19, 2019, Jehovah’s Witnesses released the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures in Marshallese at a special event held at The University of the South Pacific in Majuro, Marshall Islands.
Also tied in was an audience at a Kingdom Hall on the island of Ebeye, located over 440 kilometers (273 mi) from Majuro.
A total of 339 were in attendance for the special meeting, including the 151 publishers who serve in four congregations in the Marshall Islands.
These publishers, along with the 325 publishers who serve in the Marshallese-language field in the United States, will be able to use this translation at their meetings, in their personal study, and in the ministry.
There are an estimated 61,000 Marshallese speakers worldwide.
One brother who assisted with the translation project explains: "The New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures in Marshallese is the first modern-day translation in this language that restores Jehovah’s name in all of the places where it belongs.
It is a translation that brothers and sisters can trust, and it will help them to continue growing in their love for Jehovah. "
We are happy to hear about this recent release.
It is evidence that Jehovah is blessing the translation work in many different language groups, "both small and great. "
Psalm 49:1, 2.
Fires in the Philippines Consume Homes
In March 2019, a fire in the Philippines burned 128 homes in Calbayog City on Samar Island.
The previous month, fires broke out in Taguig City on the island of Luzon.
In total, seven homes of Jehovah’s Witnesses were destroyed by these fires.
Our displaced brothers and sisters are currently staying with other Witnesses whose homes were unaffected.
The branch office responded promptly by organizing efforts to supply food, water, and clothing.
The local elders shepherded the affected brothers and provided practical assistance.
Two Disaster Relief Committees, with the support of Local Design/Construction personnel, are preparing to rebuild the homes of our fellow worshippers.
We trust that Jehovah will continue to be a refuge for our brothers impacted by these fires.
Psalm 62:8.
Super Typhoon Yutu Brings Destruction to Northern Mariana Islands
On October 24, 2018, Super Typhoon Yutu slammed into the Northern Mariana Islands as a Category 5 storm.
The largest islands of Saipan and Tinian were particularly impacted as 280 kilometers per hour (174 mph) winds destroyed homes and cut power to thousands of residents.
The Micronesia branch office, which oversees the work in the Northern Mariana Islands, reports that no brothers or sisters were killed or injured.
However, the homes of 15 Witnesses were completely destroyed and another 40 homes were damaged.
Additionally, the missionary home in Saipan and the Kingdom Halls on both Saipan and Tinian sustained minor damage.
A Disaster Relief Committee is coordinating the distribution of relief aid to those affected.
Additionally, the publishers that were displaced by the storm are being cared for by local Witnesses.
A member of the Branch Committee will be traveling to the impacted areas to provide spiritual encouragement.
Our prayers are with our brothers as they cope with this natural disaster.
We are comforted by the knowledge that "Jehovah is near to all those calling on him, " and that "he hears their cry for help. "
Psalm 145:18, 19.
"Donetsk People’s Republic " Bans Jehovah’s Witnesses
On September 26, 2018, the Supreme Court of the "Donetsk People’s Republic " (DPR) declared the religious association of Jehovah’s Witnesses to be "extremist, " effectively banning our activities.
Neither the general prosecutor, who initiated the claim against our legal entity, nor the Court consulted with any of Jehovah’s Witnesses during the proceedings.
The banning is the latest development in an escalating pattern of religious oppression against Jehovah’s Witnesses in the region.
The situation of our brothers in certain territories of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, in eastern Ukraine, has deteriorated since the DPR Supreme Court declared some of our publications to be "extremist " in mid-2017.
During that year, police interrogated over 170 Witnesses.
Authorities in the regions have also systematically seized Kingdom Halls.
As of August 29, 2018, a total of 16 Kingdom Halls have been confiscated.
Despite these attacks on their worship, our brothers and sisters in these territories are continuing to rely on the ‘God of salvation.’
Psalm 18:46.
Love in Action​ Relief Work in the Islands
The following video includes an update of the relief work following Hurricanes Irma and Maria in lands under the Barbados, France, and United States branches.
It recounts the tireless efforts of the many who volunteered to assist their brothers and includes a summary of the visit of Mark Sanderson of the Governing Body and Gary Breaux, a helper to the Service Committee.
Does God Exist?
Yes, the Bible provides compelling evidence that God exists.
It encourages us to build faith in God, not by blindly believing religious assertions, but by using our "power of reason " and "mental perception. "
(Romans 12:1; 1 John 5:​20, footnote) Consider the following lines of reasoning based on the Bible:
The existence of an orderly universe containing life points to a Creator.
The Bible says: "Of course, every house is constructed by someone, but the one who constructed all things is God. "
(Hebrews 3:4) Although this logic is simple, many well-educated people find it to be powerful.
As humans, we have an innate desire to understand the meaning and purpose of life, a type of hunger that can remain after our physical needs have been met.
This is part of what the Bible calls our "spiritual need, " which includes the desire to know and worship God.
(Matthew 5:3; Revelation 4:​11) This spiritual need not only gives evidence that God exists but also indicates that he is a loving Creator who wants us to satisfy that need.​ Matthew 4:4.
Detailed prophecies in the Bible were written centuries ahead of time and came true exactly as predicted.
The accuracy and detail of those predictions strongly suggest that they came from a superhuman source.​ 2 Peter 1:​21.
Planet Earth as seen from space
Bible writers had scientific knowledge that was beyond the understanding of their contemporaries.
For example, in ancient times many peoples believed that the earth was supported by an animal, such as an elephant, a boar, or an ox.
In contrast, the Bible says that God is "suspending the earth upon nothing. "
(Job 26:7) Similarly, the Bible correctly describes the shape of the earth as a "sphere, " or "globe. "
(Isaiah 40:22, footnote; Douay Version) Many people feel that the most reasonable explanation for such advanced understanding is that Bible writers received their information from God.
The Bible answers many difficult questions, the type of questions that when not satisfactorily answered can lead a person to atheism.
For example: If God is loving and all-powerful, why is there suffering and evil in the world?
Why is religion so often an influence for bad rather than for good?​ Titus 1:​16.
Is God an Impersonal Force?
God exercises unsurpassed force throughout the universe.
Regarding the way he created the countless billions of stars, the Bible says: "Raise your eyes high up and see. Who has created these things?
It is the One who is bringing forth the army of them even by number, all of whom he [God] calls even by name.
Due to the abundance of dynamic energy, he also being vigorous in power, not one of them is missing. "
Isaiah 40:25, 26.
But God is much more than a powerful force.
The Bible says that he has feelings, such as love and hate.
(Psalm 11:5; John 3:16) It also reveals that the way humans act can affect God’s emotions.
Psalm 78:40, 41.
Does God Live in a Specific Location?
God lives in a specific place the heavens.
Consider these Bible passages:
In a prayer, King Solomon said: "May you yourself listen from the heavens, your established place of dwelling. " 1 Kings 8:43.
Jesus Christ taught his disciples to address their prayers to their "Father in the heavens. "
Matthew 6:9.
After Jesus was resurrected, he entered "into heaven itself, now to appear before the person of God. "
Hebrews 9:24.
Those verses clearly indicate that Jehovah God is a real person and that he dwells, not everywhere, but only in heaven.
Has Anyone Ever Seen God?
No human has literally seen God.
(Exodus 33:20; John 1:​18; 1 John 4:​12) The Bible says that "God is a Spirit, " a form of life that is invisible to the human eye.​ John 4:​24; 1 Timothy 1:​17.
God can be seen directly by angels, though, because they are spirit creatures.
(Matthew 18:10) Moreover, some humans who die will be raised to life in heaven with a spirit body and will then be able to see God.​ Philippians 3:​20, 21; 1 John 3:2.
How to "see " God now
The Bible often uses the idea of seeing figuratively, to represent enlightenment.
(Isaiah 6:​10; Jeremiah 5:​21; John 9:​39-​41) In this sense, a person can see God now with "the eyes of [his] heart " by having faith so as to know Him and appreciate His qualities.
(Ephesians 1:​18) The Bible describes steps to build this kind of faith.
Learn about God’s qualities, such as his love and generosity as well as his wisdom and power, through his creation.
(Romans 1:​20) After being reminded of God’s creative works, the faithful man Job felt as though God were right before his eyes.​ Job 42:5.
Get to know God by studying the Bible.
"If you search for [God], he will let himself be found by you, " the Bible assures us.​ 1 Chronicles 28:9; Psalm 119:2; John 17:3.
Learn about God through the life of Jesus.
Since Jesus perfectly reflected the personality of his Father, Jehovah God, he could rightly say: "Whoever has seen me has seen the Father also. "​ John 14:9.
Live in a way that pleases God, and see how he acts in your behalf.
Jesus said: "Happy are the pure in heart, since they will see God. "
As noted earlier, some who please God will be resurrected to heaven and will thus "see God " there.​ Matthew 5:8; Psalm 11:7.
Did not Moses, Abraham, and others actually see God?
In accounts where it might seem that the Bible says that humans literally saw God, the context shows that God was represented by an angel or appeared by means of a vision.
Angels.
In ancient times, God sent angels as his representatives to appear to humans and to speak in his name.
(Psalm 103:20) For example, God once spoke to Moses from a burning bush, and the Bible says that "Moses hid his face, because he was afraid to look at the true God. " (Exodus 3:​4, 6) Moses did not literally see God, though, for the context shows that he actually saw "Jehovah’s angel. "​ Exodus 3:2.
Similarly, when the Bible says that God "spoke to Moses face-to-face, " it means that God conversed with Moses intimately.
(Exodus 4:​10, 11; 33:11) Moses did not actually see God’s face, for the information he received from God "was transmitted through angels. "
(Galatians 3:​19; Acts 7:​53) Still, Moses’ faith in God was so strong that the Bible described him as "seeing the One who is invisible. "​ Hebrews 11:27.
In the same way that he spoke to Moses, God communicated with Abraham through angels.
Granted, a casual reading of the Bible might give the impression that Abraham literally saw God.
(Genesis 18:​1, 33) However, the context shows that the "three men " who came to Abraham were actually angels sent by God.
Abraham recognized them as God’s representatives and addressed them as if he were speaking directly to Jehovah.​ Genesis 18:​2, 3, 22, 32; 19:1.
Visions.
God has also appeared to humans through visions, or scenes presented to a person’s mind.
For instance, when the Bible says that Moses and other Israelites "saw the God of Israel, " they really "saw a vision of the true God. " (Exodus 24:​9-​11) Likewise, the Bible sometimes says that prophets "saw Jehovah. "
(Isaiah 6:1; Daniel 7:9; Amos 9:1) In each case, the context shows that they were given a vision of God rather than a direct view of him.​ Isaiah 1:1; Daniel 7:2; Amos 1:1.
Is God a Trinity?
Many Christian denominations teach that God is a Trinity.
However, note what the Encyclopædia Britannica states: "Neither the word Trinity nor the explicit doctrine appears in the New Testament . . .
The doctrine developed gradually over several centuries and through many controversies. "
In fact, the God of the Bible is never described as being part of a Trinity. Note these Bible passages:
"Jehovah our God is one Jehovah. "
Deuteronomy 6:4.
"You, whose name is Jehovah, you alone are the Most High over all the earth. "
Psalm 83:18.
"This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ. "
John 17:3.
"God is only one. "
Galatians 3:20.
Why do most Christian denominations say that God is a Trinity?
Does God Change His Mind?
Yes, he does, in the sense that he changes his attitude when people change their behavior.
For example, when God sent a judgment message to the people of ancient Israel, he said: "Perhaps they will listen and each one will turn back from his evil way, and I will change my mind concerning the calamity that I intend to bring on them because of their evil deeds. "​ Jeremiah 26:3.
Many Bible translations render this verse as saying that God would "repent " over the intended calamity, which could be understood to mean that he had made a mistake.
However, the original Hebrew word can mean "change of mind or intention. "
One scholar wrote: "A change in man’s conduct brings about a change in God’s judgment. "
Of course, just because God can change his mind does not mean that he must change it.
Consider some situations where the Bible says that God has not changed his mind:
God did not allow Balak to make Him change His mind and curse the nation of Israel.​ Numbers 23:18-​20.
Once King Saul of Israel became firmly set in badness, God did not change his mind about rejecting him as king.​ 1 Samuel 15:28, 29.
God will fulfill his promise to make his Son a priest forever.
God will not change His mind.​ Psalm 110:4.
Doesn’t the Bible say that God never changes?
Yes, the Bible records God as saying: "I am Jehovah; I do not change. "
(Malachi 3:6) Similarly, the Bible says that God "does not vary or change like the shifting shadows. "
(James 1:​17) This, however, does not contradict what the Bible says about God changing his mind.
God is unchangeable in that his personality and standards of love and justice never alter.
(Deuteronomy 32:4; 1 John 4:8) Still, he can give different instructions to people at different times.
For instance, God gave opposite instructions to King David for fighting two consecutive battles, yet both methods succeeded.​ 2 Samuel 5:​18-​25.
Is God sorry that he created humans?
No, although he does regret that most people ignore or reject him.
Describing conditions before the global Flood of Noah’s day, the Bible says: "Jehovah regretted that he had made men on the earth, and his heart was saddened. " (Genesis 6:6) In this verse, the word "regretted " comes from the Hebrew word that can mean "change of mind. "
God changed his mind about most of the people who lived before the Flood because they had become wicked.
(Genesis 6:​5, 11) Even though he was saddened that they chose to follow a bad course, he did not change his attitude toward the entire human race.
In fact, he preserved mankind through the Flood by means of Noah and his family.​ Genesis 8:​21; 2 Peter 2:​5, 9.
What Is the Holy Spirit?
The holy spirit is God’s power in action, his active force.
(Micah 3:8; Luke 1:​35) God sends out his spirit by projecting his energy to any place to accomplish his will.​ Psalm 104:30; 139:7.
In the Bible, the word "spirit " is translated from the Hebrew word ruach and the Greek word pneuma.
Most often, those words refer to God’s active force, or holy spirit.
(Genesis 1:2) However, the Bible also uses those words in other senses:
Breath.​ Habakkuk 2:​19; Revelation 13:15.
Wind.​ Genesis 8:1; John 3:8.
The vital, or animating, force in living creatures.​ Job 34:14, 15.
A person’s disposition or attitude.​ Numbers 14:24.
Spirit persons, including God and the angels.​ 1 Kings 22:21; John 4:​24.
These meanings all share the sense of something invisible to humans that produces visible effects.
Similarly, the spirit of God, "like the wind, is invisible, immaterial and powerful. "​ An Expository Dictionary of New Testament Words, by W. E. Vine.
The Bible also refers to God’s holy spirit as his "hands " or "fingers. "
(Psalm 8:3; 19:1; Luke 11:20; compare Matthew 12:28.)
Just as a craftsman uses his hands and fingers to do his work, God has used his spirit to produce such results as the following:
The universe.​ Psalm 33:6; Isaiah 66:​1, 2.
The Bible.​ 2 Peter 1:​20, 21.
The miracles performed by his ancient servants and their zealous preaching.​ Luke 4:​18; Acts 1:8; 1 Corinthians 12:​4-​11.
The fine qualities displayed by people who obey him.​ Galatians 5:​22, 23.
The holy spirit is not a person
By referring to God’s spirit as his "hands, " "fingers, " or "breath, " the Bible shows that the holy spirit is not a person.
(Exodus 15:​8, 10) A craftsman’s hands cannot function independent of his mind and body; likewise, God’s holy spirit operates only as he directs it.
(Luke 11:13) The Bible also compares God’s spirit to water and associates it with such things as faith and knowledge.
These comparisons all point to the impersonal nature of the holy spirit.​ Isaiah 44:3; Acts 6:5; 2 Corinthians 6:6.
The Bible gives the names of Jehovah God and of his Son, Jesus Christ; yet, nowhere does it name the holy spirit.
(Isaiah 42:8; Luke 1:​31) When the Christian martyr Stephen was given a miraculous heavenly vision, he saw only two persons, not three.
The Bible says: "He, being full of holy spirit, gazed into heaven and caught sight of God’s glory and of Jesus standing at God’s right hand. "
(Acts 7:​55) The holy spirit was God’s power in action, enabling Stephen to see the vision.
Misconceptions about the holy spirit
Misconception: The "Holy Ghost, " or holy spirit, is a person and is part of the Trinity, as stated at 1 John 5:​7, 8 in the King James version of the Bible.
Fact: The King James version of the Bible includes at 1 John 5:​7, 8 the words "in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these three are one.
And there are three that bear witness in earth. "
However, researchers have found that those words were not written by the apostle John and so do not belong in the Bible.
Professor Bruce M. Metzger wrote: "That these words are spurious and have no right to stand in the New Testament is certain. "​ A Textual Commentary on the Greek New Testament.
Misconception: The Bible personifies the holy spirit, and this proves that it is a person.
Fact: The Scriptures do at times personify the holy spirit, but this does not prove that the holy spirit is a person.
The Bible also personifies wisdom, death, and sin.
(Proverbs 1:​20; Romans 5:​17, 21) For example, wisdom is said to have "works " and "children, " and sin is depicted as seducing, killing, and working out covetousness.​ Matthew 11:19; Luke 7:​35; Romans 7:​8, 11.
Similarly, when the apostle John quoted Jesus, he personified the holy spirit as a "helper " (paraclete) that would give evidence, guide, speak, hear, declare, glorify, and receive.
He used masculine personal pronouns such as "he " or "him " when referring to that "helper. "
Fact: The Bible sometimes uses "name " to stand for power or authority.
(Deuteronomy 18:​5, 19-​22; Esther 8:​10) This is similar to its use in the English expression "in the name of the law, " which does not mean that the law is a person.
A person who is baptized "in the name of " the holy spirit recognizes the power and role of the holy spirit in accomplishing God’s will.​ Matthew 28:19.
Misconception: Jesus’ apostles and other early disciples believed that the holy spirit was a person.
Fact: The Bible does not say that, nor does history.
The Encyclopædia Britannica states: "The definition that the Holy Spirit was a distinct divine Person . . . came at the Council of Constantinople in ad 381. "
This was over 250 years after the last of the apostles had died.
Does God Have a Name?
Humans all have personal names.
Wouldn’t it be reasonable for God to have a name?
Having and using personal names is a vital part of human friendships.
Should it be different when it comes to our friendship with God?
In the Bible, God says: "I am Jehovah. That is my name. "
(Isaiah 42:8) Although he also has many titles, such as "God Almighty, " "Sovereign Lord, " and "Creator, " he honors his worshippers by inviting them to address him by his personal name.
Genesis 17:1; Acts 4:24; 1 Peter 4:19.
Many translations of the Bible contain God’s personal name at Exodus 6:3.
That passage says: "I used to appear to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob as God Almighty, but as respects my name Jehovah I did not make myself known to them. "
Jehovah is a rendering of God’s name in English that has been used for centuries.
While many scholars prefer the spelling "Yahweh, " Jehovah is the form of the name that is most widely recognized.
The first part of the Bible was written not in English but in Hebrew, a language that is read from right to left.
In that language, the divine name appears as four consonants, יהוה.
Those four Hebrew characters transliterated YHWH are known as the Tetragrammaton.
Is God’s Name Jesus?
Jesus referred to himself as "God’s Son " or "the Son of God. "
(John 10:36; 11:4) Jesus never identified himself as Almighty God.
Moreover, Jesus prayed to God.
(Matthew 26:39) And while teaching his followers how to pray, Jesus said: "Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified. "
Jesus revealed God’s name when he quoted an ancient passage of Scripture and said: "Hear, O Israel, Jehovah our God is one Jehovah. "
Mark 12:29; Deuteronomy 6:4.
Who Is Jehovah?
Jehovah is the true God of the Bible, the Creator of all things.
(Revelation 4:​11) The prophets Abraham and Moses worshipped him, as did Jesus.
(Genesis 24:27; Exodus 15:1, 2; John 20:17) He is the God, not just of one people, but of "all the earth. "​ Psalm 47:2.
Jehovah is God’s unique name as revealed in the Bible.
(Exodus 3:​15; Psalm 83:18) It comes from a Hebrew verb that means "to become, " and a number of scholars suggest that the name means "He Causes to Become. "
This definition well fits Jehovah’s role as the Creator and the Fulfiller of his purpose.
(Isaiah 55:10, 11) The Bible also helps us to know the Person behind the name Jehovah, especially his dominant quality of love.
Exodus 34:5-7; Luke 6:35; 1 John 4:8.
The name Jehovah is an English translation of the Hebrew name for God​ the four letters יהוה (YHWH), known as the Tetragrammaton.
The exact pronunciation of the divine name in ancient Hebrew is not known.
However, the form "Jehovah " has a long history in the English language, first appearing in William Tyndale’s Bible translation of 1530.
Why is the pronunciation of God’s name in ancient Hebrew unknown?
Ancient Hebrew was written without vowels, using only consonants.
The Hebrew-speaking reader could easily provide the appropriate vowels.
However, after the Hebrew Scriptures ( "Old Testament ") were completed, some Jews adopted the superstitious belief that it was wrong to utter God’s personal name.
When they read aloud a scripture that contained God’s name, they substituted expressions such as "Lord " or "God. "
As centuries passed, this superstition spread and the ancient pronunciation was eventually lost.
Some feel that the divine name was pronounced "Yahweh, " while others suggest different possibilities.
A Dead Sea Scroll containing a portion of Leviticus in Greek transliterates the name Iao.
Early Greek writers also suggest the pronunciations Iae, Iabe, and Iaoue, but none of these can be proved to be the pronunciation used in ancient Hebrew.
Misconceptions about God’s name in the Bible
Misconception: Translations that use "Jehovah " have added this name.
Fact: The Hebrew word for God’s name in the form of the Tetragrammaton appears some 7,000 times in the Bible.
Most translations arbitrarily remove God’s name and replace it with a title such as "Lord. "
Misconception: Almighty God does not need a unique name.
Fact: God himself inspired Bible writers to use his name thousands of times, and he directs those who worship him to use his name.
(Isaiah 42:8; Joel 2:​32; Malachi 3:​16; Romans 10:13) In fact, God condemned false prophets who tried to make people forget his name.​ Jeremiah 23:27.
Misconception: Following the tradition of the Jews, God’s name should be removed from the Bible.
Fact: It is true that some Jewish scribes refused to pronounce the divine name.
However, they did not remove it from their copies of the Bible.
In any case, God does not want us to follow human traditions that deviate from his commandments.​ Matthew 15:​1-3.
Misconception: The divine name should not be used in the Bible because it is not known exactly how to pronounce it in Hebrew.
Fact: This line of reasoning assumes that God expects people who speak different languages to pronounce his name identically.
However, the Bible indicates that God’s worshippers in the past who spoke different languages pronounced proper names differently.
Consider, for example, the Israelite judge Joshua.
First-century Christians who spoke Hebrew would have pronounced his name Yehohshuaʽ, while those who spoke Greek would have said Iesous.
The Bible records the Greek translation of Joshua’s Hebrew name, showing that Christians followed the sensible course of using the form of proper names common in their language.​ Acts 7:​45; Hebrews 4:8.
The same principle can be applied to translating the divine name.
Far more important than the exact pronunciation chosen is that God’s name be given its rightful place in the Bible.
How Many Names Does God Have?
God has just one personal name.
It is written יהוה in Hebrew and is usually rendered "Jehovah " in English.
Through his prophet Isaiah, God stated: "I am Jehovah.
That is my name. "
(Isaiah 42:8) This name appears about 7,000 times in ancient Bible manuscripts​ far more frequently than any other term for God or, indeed, anyone else’s personal name.
Are there other names for God?
Although the Bible refers to God by only one personal name, it uses many titles and descriptions for him.
The following list of some of those titles and descriptions shows how each one reveals an aspect of Jehovah’s nature or his personality.
Title
Reference
Meaning
Allah
(None)
Derived from Arabic, the word "Allah " is not a personal name but a title meaning "God. "
Bible translations in Arabic and other languages use "Allah " as an equivalent for "God. "
Almighty
Genesis 17:1
Has irresistible power.
The Hebrew expression ʼEl Shaddai, "God Almighty, " occurs seven times in the Bible.
The Alpha and the Omega
Revelation 1:8; 21:6; 22:13
"The first and the last, " or "the beginning and the end, " meaning that there was no Almighty God before Jehovah and there will be none after him.
(Isaiah 43:10) Alpha and omega are the first and last letters of the Greek alphabet.
Ancient of Days
Daniel 7:​9, 13, 22
Had no beginning; existed for an eternity before anyone or anything else came into being.​ Psalm 90:2.
Creator
Isaiah 40:28
Brought all things into existence.
Father
Matthew 6:9
Life-giver.
God
Genesis 1:1
An object of worship; a strong One.
The Hebrew word ʼElohim is plural, indicating Jehovah’s majesty, dignity, or excellence.
God of gods
Deuteronomy 10:17
The supreme God, in contrast with the "worthless gods " worshipped by some.​ Isaiah 2:8.
Grand Instructor
Isaiah 30:20, 21
Gives beneficial teaching and direction.​ Isaiah 48:17, 18.
Grand Maker
Psalm 149:2
Brought all things into existence.​ Revelation 4:​11.
Happy God
1 Timothy 1:​11
Characterized by joy and happiness.​ Psalm 104:31.
Hearer of prayer
Psalm 65:2
Personally listens to each prayer offered to him in faith.
I Am That I Am
Exodus 3:​14, King James Version
Becomes whatever is needed to fulfill his purpose.
This phrase has also been translated "I Will Become whatsoever I please " or "I Will Become What I Choose to Become. "
(The Emphasised Bible, by J. B. Rotherham; New World Translation) This description helps to explain the personal name, Jehovah, given in the next verse.​ Exodus 3:​15.
Jealous
Exodus 34:14, King James Version
Tolerates no rivalry in worship.
This term has also been translated "does not tolerate rivals " and "known for requiring exclusive devotion. "​ God’s Word Bible; New World Translation.
King of eternity
Revelation 15:3
His rulership has no beginning or end.
Lord
Psalm 135:5
Owner or master; Hebrew ʼAdhohn and ʼAdhonim.
Lord of hosts, Lord of Sabaoth
Isaiah 1:9, King James Version; Romans 9:​29, King James Version
Commander of vast forces of angels.
The title "Lord of Sabaoth " can also be rendered "Jehovah of armies " and "Lord of the [heavenly] armies. "​ Romans 9:​29, New World Translation; NET Bible, footnote.
Most High
Psalm 47:2
Occupies the supreme position.
Most Holy One
Proverbs 9:​10
More holy (morally clean and pure) than any other being.
Potter
Isaiah 64:8
Has authority over individuals and nations, just as a potter has authority over clay.​ Romans 9:​20, 21.
Redeemer, Repurchaser
Isaiah 41:14; King James Version
Recovers or buys back mankind from sin and death through the ransom sacrifice of Jesus Christ.​ John 3:​16.
Rock
Psalm 18:​2, 46
A secure refuge and source of salvation.
Savior
Isaiah 45:21
Delivers from danger or destruction.
Shepherd
Psalm 23:1
Cares for his worshippers.
Sovereign Lord
Genesis 15:2
Has supreme authority; Hebrew Adhonai.
Supreme One
Daniel 7:​18, 27
The highest sovereign.
Place names in the Hebrew Scriptures
Some place names in the Bible include God’s personal name, but these are not alternate names for God.
Place name
Jehovah-jireh
Genesis 22:13, 14
"Jehovah Will Provide. "
Jehovah-nissi
Exodus 17:15
"Jehovah Is My Signal Pole, " or "my Banner. "
(Today’s New International Version) Jehovah is a God around whom his people can rally for protection and help.​ Exodus 17:13-​16.
Jehovah-shalom
Judges 6:​23, 24
"Jehovah Is Peace. "
Jehovah-shammah
Ezekiel 48:35, footnote, American Standard Version
"Jehovah Is There. "
Reasons to know and use God’s name
God must feel that his personal name, Jehovah, is important, because he included it thousands of times in the Bible.​ Malachi 1:​11.
God’s Son, Jesus, repeatedly stressed the importance of God’s name.
For instance, he prayed to Jehovah: "Let your name be sanctified. "​ Matthew 6:9; John 17:6.
Those who come to know and use God’s name take the first steps in building a friendship with Jehovah.
(Psalm 9:​10; Malachi 3:​16) Such a relationship enables them to benefit from God’s promise: "Because he has affection for me, I will rescue him.
I will protect him because he knows my name. "​ Psalm 91:14.
The Bible acknowledges: "There are so-called gods, whether in heaven or on earth, just as there are many ‘gods’ and many ‘lords.’ " (1 Corinthians 8:​5, 6) Yet it clearly identifies the one true God by his name, Jehovah.​ Psalm 83:18.
What Is the Will of God for My Life?
God’s will is that you come to know him as a Person, draw close to him, and then love and serve him with your whole heart.
(Matthew 22:37, 38; James 4:8) You can learn how to do God’s will from the life and teachings of Jesus.
(John 7:16, 17) Jesus didn’t just talk about the will of God he lived it.
In fact, Jesus said that his purpose in life was "to do, not my will, but the will of him that sent me. "
John 6:38.
Do I need a special sign, vision, or calling to know what the will of God is for me?
No, because the Bible contains God’s message to mankind.
It has what you need to be "completely equipped for every good work. " (2 Timothy 3:16, 17) God wants you to use the Bible along with your "power of reason " to learn his will for you.
Romans 12:1, 2; Ephesians 5:17.
Can I really do God’s will?
Yes, you can, for the Bible says: "God’s commands are not too hard for us. " (1 John 5:3, Easy-to-Read Version) That’s not to say that obeying God’s commands is always easy.
But the benefits you will gain far outweigh the effort you must put forth.
Jesus himself said: "How happy are those who hear the word of God and obey it! "
Luke 11:28, Good News Translation.
What Does the Bible Say About Free Will?
Is God in Control?
The Bible’s answer
God dignifies us with free will, the power to make decisions of our own rather than having God or fate predetermine what we do.
Consider what the Bible teaches.
God created humans in his image.
(Genesis 1:26) Unlike animals, which act mainly on instinct, we resemble our Creator in our capacity to display such qualities as love and justice.
And like our Creator, we have free will.
To a great extent, we can determine our future.
The Bible encourages us to "choose life . . . by listening to [God’s] voice, " that is, by choosing to obey his commands.
(Deuteronomy 30:19, 20) This offer would be meaningless, even cruel, if we lacked free will.
Instead of forcing us to do what he says, God warmly appeals to us: "O if only you would actually pay attention to my commandments! Then your peace would become just like a river. "
Isaiah 48:18.
Our success or failure is not determined by fate.
If we want to succeed at an endeavor, we must work hard.
"All that your hand finds to do, " says the Bible, "do with your very power.
"(Ecclesiastes 9:10) It also says: "The plans of the diligent one surely make for advantage. "
Proverbs 21:5.
Free will is a precious gift from God, for it lets us love him with our "whole heart " because we want to.
Matthew 22:37.
Doesn’t God control all things?
The Bible does teach that God is Almighty, that his power is not limited by anyone other than himself.
(Job 37:23; Isaiah 40:26) However, he does not use his power to control everything.
For example, the Bible says that God was "exercising self-control " toward ancient Babylon, an enemy of his people.
(Isaiah 42:14) Similarly, for now, he chooses to tolerate those who misuse their free will to harm others.
But God will not do so indefinitely.
Psalm 37:10, 11.
Is God to Blame for Our Suffering?
The Bible emphatically answers no!
Suffering was not part of Jehovah God’s purpose for mankind.
However, the first human couple rebelled against God’s rulership, choosing to set their own standards of good and bad.
They turned away from God and suffered the consequences.
Today we are experiencing the effects of their bad choice.
But in no way did God originate human suffering.
The Bible says: "When under trial, let no one say: ‘I am being tried by God.’
For with evil things God cannot be tried nor does he himself try anyone. "
(James 1:13) Suffering can afflict anyone even those who are favored by God.
Is the Bible a Book of Human Wisdom?
The Bible, also known as the Holy Scriptures, does contain many wise sayings.
However, note the claim that the Bible makes for itself: "All Scripture is inspired of God. " (2 Timothy 3:16) There is much evidence to back up that claim.
Consider the following:
No one has ever successfully challenged the historical accuracy of the Bible.
The Bible writers were honest men who wrote with openness of heart.
Their candor gives their writing the clear ring of truth.
The Bible has one central theme: the vindication of God’s right to rule mankind and the fulfillment of his purpose by means of his heavenly Kingdom.
Although written thousands of years ago, the Bible is free of mistaken scientific ideas that had gained wide acceptance in ancient times.
Documented historical evidence proves that Bible prophecies, or predictions, have come true.
Is the Bible a Record of God’s Thoughts?
Many Bible writers state that God directed what they wrote.
Note these examples:
King David: "The spirit of Jehovah it was that spoke by me, and his word was upon my tongue. " 2 Samuel 23:1, 2.
The prophet Isaiah: "This is what the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, has said. "
Isaiah 22:15.
The apostle John: "A revelation by Jesus Christ, which God gave him. "
Revelation 1:1.
Did Moses Write the Bible?
God used Moses to write the first five books of the Bible: Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy.
He also likely wrote the book of Job and Psalm 90.
But Moses was only one of some 40 people whom God used to write the Bible.
Can Anyone Know Who Really Wrote the Bible?
Many people are told that we can’t be sure who wrote the Bible.
But the Bible is often clear about who penned its contents.
Some parts begin with such phrases as "the words of Nehemiah, " "the vision of Isaiah, " and "the word of Jehovah that occurred to Joel. "
Nehemiah 1:1; Isaiah 1:1; Joel 1:1.
Most Bible writers acknowledged that they wrote in the name of Jehovah, the one true God, and that they were guided by him.
Prophets who wrote the Hebrew Scriptures proclaimed more than 300 times: "This is what Jehovah has said. "
(Amos 1:3; Micah 2:3; Nahum 1:12) Other writers received God’s message through angels.
Zechariah 1:7, 9.
The Bible was written by some 40 men over the course of 1,600 years.
Some men were used to write more than one book of the Bible.
In fact, the Bible is a miniature library of 66 books.
It consists of the 39 books of the Hebrew Scriptures, called by many the Old Testament, and the 27 books of the Christian Greek Scriptures, often called the New Testament.
Has the Bible Been Changed or Tampered With?
A comparison of ancient manuscripts shows that the Bible is basically unchanged despite millenniums of recopying on perishable materials.
Does this mean that mistakes in copying were never made?
Thousands of ancient Bible manuscripts have been found.
Some of these contain a number of differences, indicating that mistakes were made in copying.
Most of these differences are minor and do not change the meaning of the text.
However, a few significant differences have been discovered, some of which appear to be deliberate attempts made long ago to alter the Bible’s message.
Consider two examples:
At 1 John 5:7, some older Bible translations contain the following words: "in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these three are one. "
However, reliable manuscripts confirm that these words were not in the original text.
They were added later.
Thus, reliable modern Bible translations have excluded them.
God’s personal name appears thousands of times in ancient manuscripts of the Bible.
Yet, numerous Bible translations have replaced it with titles such as "Lord " or "God. "
How can we be sure that there are not many more errors waiting to be found?
At this point, so many manuscripts have been discovered that it is easier than ever before to detect errors.
What has a comparison of these documents revealed regarding the accuracy of the Bible today?
Commenting on the text of the Hebrew Scriptures (commonly called the "Old Testament "), scholar William H. Green stated: "It may be safely said that no other work of antiquity has been so accurately transmitted. "
Regarding the Christian Greek Scriptures, or "New Testament, " Bible scholar F. F. Bruce wrote: "The evidence for our New Testament writings is ever so much greater than the evidence for many writings of classical authors, the authenticity of which no one dreams of questioning. "
Sir Frederic Kenyon, a noted authority on Bible manuscripts, stated that one "can take the whole Bible in his hand and say without fear or hesitation that he holds in it the true Word of God, handed down without essential loss from generation to generation throughout the centuries. "
What additional reasons are there for confidence that the Bible has been transmitted with accuracy?
Both Jewish and Christian copyists preserved accounts that expose the serious mistakes made by God’s people.
(Numbers 20:12; 2 Samuel 11:​2-4; Galatians 2:​11-​14) Likewise, they preserved passages that condemn the Jewish nation’s disobedience and that expose man-made doctrines.
(Hosea 4:2; Malachi 2:​8, 9; Matthew 23:​8, 9; 1 John 5:​21) By copying these accounts accurately, the copyists showed their trustworthiness and their high regard for God’s sacred Word.
Is it not reasonable that God, having inspired the Bible in the first place, would also preserve its accuracy?
(Isaiah 40:8; 1 Peter 1:​24, 25) After all, he intended it to benefit not only people of long ago but also us today.
(1 Corinthians 10:11) In fact, "all the things that were written beforehand were written for our instruction, so that through our endurance and through the comfort from the Scriptures we might have hope. "​ Romans 15:4.
Jesus and his followers quoted from copies of the Hebrew Scriptures without expressing any concern about the accuracy of those ancient texts.​ Luke 4:​16-​21; Acts 17:​1-3.
Is the Bible a White Man’s Book?
The Bible wasn’t written by Europeans.
All of the men that God used to write the Bible were from Asia.
The Bible doesn’t promote one race as being superior to another.
In fact, it states: "God is not partial, but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him. "
Acts 10:34, 35.
When Were the Accounts About Jesus Written?
Regarding his record of the events in Jesus’ life, the apostle John wrote: "He that has seen it has borne witness, and his witness is true, and that man knows he tells true things, in order that you also may believe. "
John 19:35.
One reason to trust the Gospel accounts recorded by Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John is that they were written while many eyewitnesses to the events they describe were still alive.
According to some sources, the Gospel of Matthew was written as early as the eighth year after Christ’s death, that is, about 41 C.E. Many scholars favor a somewhat later date, but there is general agreement that all the books of the Christian Greek Scriptures were written during the first century C.E.
People who saw Jesus while he was alive on earth, witnessed his death, and observed his resurrection could verify the Gospel accounts.
They could also easily expose any inaccuracies if there had been such.
Professor F. F. Bruce observes: "One of the strong points in the original apostolic preaching is the confident appeal to the knowledge of the hearers; they not only said, ‘We are witnesses of these things,’ but also, ‘As you yourselves also know’ (Acts 2:22). "
Understanding the Bible What Are the Keys?
The Bible itself provides many of the keys to understanding it.
Regardless of your background, God’s message in the Bible "is not too difficult for you, nor is it far away. " Deuteronomy 30:11.
Keys to understanding the Bible
Have the right attitude.
Accept the Bible as God’s Word.
Be humble, since God opposes the proud.
(1 Thessalonians 2:13; James 4:6) However, avoid blind faith God wants you to use your "power of reason. "
Romans 12:1, 2.
Pray for wisdom.
"Do not lean upon your own understanding, " the Bible says at Proverbs 3:5.
Instead, "keep on asking God " for wisdom in understanding the Bible.
James 1:5.
Be consistent.
You will benefit much more from Bible study if you do it regularly rather than sporadically.
Joshua 1:8.
Study by topic.
A topical study, in which you analyze what the Bible says about a particular topic or subject, is an effective way to learn what the Scriptures teach.
Start with "the beginning lessons, " as it were, and then "go forward to more mature (advanced) teaching. "
(Hebrews 6:1, 2, Easy-to-Read Version) You’ll find that you can compare scripture with scripture and learn that various parts of the Bible explain each other, even the parts that are "hard to understand. " 2 Peter 3:16.
Get help from others.
The Bible encourages us to accept help from others who understand the Bible.
(Acts 8:30, 31) Jehovah’s Witnesses offer a free Bible study program.
Like the early Christians, they use Scriptural references to help others discern what the Bible really teaches.
Acts 17:2, 3.
Things you don’t need
High intellect or education.
Jesus’ 12 apostles understood the Scriptures and taught them to others, even though the apostles were considered by some to be "unlettered and ordinary. "
Acts 4:13.
Money.
You can learn what the Bible teaches without cost.
Jesus told his disciples: "You received free, give free. "
Matthew 10:8.
Are There Contradictions in the Bible?
No, the entire Bible is harmonious.
While some passages might seem to show the Bible contradicting itself, they can usually be understood correctly by applying one or more of the following principles:
Consider the context.
Any author can appear to contradict himself if his words are taken out of context.
Consider the writer’s viewpoint.
Eyewitnesses might describe an event accurately but not use the exact same wording or include the same details.
Take into account historical facts and customs.
Distinguish between the figurative and the literal uses of a word.
Recognize that an action may be attributed to someone even if he did not personally carry it out.
Use an accurate Bible translation.
Avoid trying to reconcile what the Bible says with mistaken religious ideas or dogma.
The following examples show how these principles can explain some seeming inconsistencies in the Bible.
Principle 1: Context
If God rested on the seventh day, how has he continued working?
The context of the Genesis creation account shows that the statement that God "began to rest on the seventh day from all his work that he had been doing " refers specifically to his work of physical creation respecting the earth.
(Genesis 2:​2-4) Jesus did not contradict this, however, when he said that God "has kept working until now, " because he was talking about other works of God.
(John 5:​17) God’s works include the inspiration of the Bible and his guidance and care of mankind.​ Psalm 20:6; 105:5; 2 Peter 1:​21.
Principles 2 and 3: Viewpoint and history
Jesus heals the blind man
Where did Jesus heal the blind man?
The book of Luke says that Jesus healed a blind man as Jesus "was getting near to Jericho, " while the parallel account in Matthew mentions two blind men and says that the incident occurred when Jesus was "going out of Jericho. "
(Luke 18:35-​43; Matthew 20:29-​34) These two accounts, written from different viewpoints, actually complement each other.
Regarding the number of men, Matthew is more specific as to there being two, while Luke focuses on the one man to whom Jesus directed his remarks.
As for the location, archaeologists have found that in Jesus’ time Jericho was a double city, with the old Jewish city situated about one and a half kilometers (1 mi) away from the newer Roman city.
Jesus may have been between the two cities when he performed this miracle.
Principle 4: Figurative and literal terms
Will the earth be destroyed?
At Ecclesiastes 1:4, the Bible says that "the earth remains forever, " which to some apparently conflicts with its statement that "the elements will be destroyed by heat​ with the earth. " (2 Peter 3:​10, Beck) In the Bible, however, the word "earth " is used both literally, referring to our planet, and figuratively, referring to the people who live on it.
(Genesis 1:1; 11:1) The destruction of the "earth " described at 2 Peter 3:​10 refers, not to the burning up of our planet, but to the "destruction of the ungodly people. "​ 2 Peter 3:7.
Principle 5: Attribution
In Capernaum, who brought the centurion’s request to Jesus?
Matthew 8:​5, 6 says that the centurion (army officer) himself came to Jesus, while Luke 7:3 says that the centurion sent older men of the Jews to make his request.
This apparent Bible contradiction can be understood in that the army officer initiated the request, but he sent the older men as his representatives.
Principle 6: Accurate translation
Do we all sin?
The Bible teaches that we all inherit sin from the first man, Adam.
(Romans 5:​12) Some translations seem to contradict this by saying that a good person "does no sin " or "sinneth not. " (1 John 3:6, The Bible in Basic English; King James Version) In the original language, though, the Greek verb for "sin " at 1 John 3:6 is in the present tense, which in that language normally indicates a continuous action.
There is a difference between inherited sin, which we cannot avoid, and the deliberate, continuous practice of disobeying God’s laws.
Thus, some translations clear up this seeming contradiction by accurately using phrases such as "does not practice sin " or "does not habitually sin. "​ New World Translation; Phillips.
Principle 7: The Bible, not dogma
Is Jesus equal to God or lesser than God?
Jesus once said: "I and the Father are one, " which seems to contradict his statement that "the Father is greater than I am. "
(John 10:30; 14:28) To understand those verses correctly, we must examine what the Bible really says about Jehovah and Jesus rather than try to harmonize the verses with the Trinity dogma, which is not based on the Bible.
The Bible shows that Jehovah is not only Jesus’ Father but also Jesus’ God, the One whom even Jesus worships.
(Matthew 4:​10; Mark 15:34; John 17:3; 20:17; 2 Corinthians 1:3) Jesus is not equal to God.
The context of Jesus’ statement "I and the Father are one " shows that he was talking about the oneness of purpose that he shared with his Father, Jehovah God.
Jesus later said: "The Father is in union with me and I am in union with the Father. "
(John 10:38) Jesus shared this unity of purpose with his followers as well, for he prayed to God about them: "I have given them the glory that you have given me, in order that they may be one just as we are one.
I in union with them and you in union with me. "​ John 17:22, 23.
Who or What Is the Word of God?
The expression "the word of God " usually refers to a divine message or to a collection of those messages.
(Luke 11:28) In a few places, "The Word of God " or "the Word " is used as a personal title.​ Revelation 19:13; John 1:​14.
A divine message.
The prophets often stated that the messages they delivered were God’s word.
For example, Jeremiah introduced his prophetic messages with the expression "the word of Jehovah came to me. "
(Jeremiah 1:​4, 11, 13; 2:1) Before telling Saul that God had chosen him as king, the prophet Samuel said: "Stand still now, so that I may let you hear the word of God. "​ 1 Samuel 9:​27.
A personal title.
"The Word " also appears in the Bible as a title for Jesus Christ, both as a spirit in heaven and as a human on earth.
Consider some reasons for this conclusion:
The Word lived before all other creation.
"In the beginning was the Word . . .
This one was in the beginning with God. "
(John 1:​1, 2) Jesus is "the firstborn of all creation . . .
He is before all other things. "​ Colossians 1:​13-​15, 17.
The Word came to earth as a human.
"The Word became flesh and resided among us. "
(John 1:​14) Christ Jesus "emptied himself and took a slave’s form and became human. "​ Philippians 2:​5-7.
The Word is God’s Son.
After stating that "the Word became flesh, " as quoted above, the apostle John continued: "We had a view of his glory, a glory such as belongs to an only-begotten son from a father. "
(John 1:​14) John also wrote: "Jesus is God’s Son. "​ 1 John 4:​15.
The Word possesses godlike attributes.
"The Word was a god, " or "was divine. "
(John 1:1; An American Translation) Jesus is "the reflection of God’s glory and the exact representation of his very being. "​ Hebrews 1:​2, 3.
The Word rules as a king.
The Bible states that on the head of the Word of God are "many royal headbands. "
(Revelation 19:12, 13; footnote) The Word is also named "King of kings and Lord of lords. "
(Revelation 19:16) Jesus is called "the King of those who rule as kings and Lord of those who rule as lords. "​ 1 Timothy 6:​14, 15.
The Word serves as God’s spokesman.
The title "the Word " apparently identifies its bearer as one whom God uses to convey information and instructions.
Jesus said that he performed this role: "The Father who sent me has himself given me a commandment about what to say and what to speak. . . .
So whatever I speak, I speak just as the Father has told me. "​ John 12:49, 50.
What Is the Torah?
The English word "Torah " comes from the Hebrew word tohrah, which can be translated as "instruction, " "teaching, " or "law. "
(Proverbs 1:8; 3:1; 28:4) The following examples show how this Hebrew word is used in the Bible.
tohrah often refers to the first five books of the Bible​ Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy.
These are also called the Pentateuch, from a Greek word meaning "fivefold volume. "
The Torah was written by Moses, so it is called "the book of the Law of Moses. "
(Joshua 8:​31; Nehemiah 8:1) Evidently, it was originally written as one book but was later divided for easier handling.
tohrah is also used for the laws given to Israel on a particular subject, such as "the law [tohrah] of the sin offering, " "the law about leprosy, " and "the law about the Nazirite. "​ Leviticus 6:​25; 14:57; Numbers 6:​13.
tohrah sometimes refers to instruction and teaching, whether from parents, wise ones, or God himself.​ Proverbs 1:8; 3:1; 13:14; Isaiah 2:3, footnote.
What is in the Torah, or Pentateuch?
The history of God’s dealings with humankind from creation to the death of Moses.​ Genesis 1:​27, 28; Deuteronomy 34:5.
The regulations of the Mosaic Law.
(Exodus 24:3) That Law is made up of more than 600 statutes.
Prominent among them is the Shema, or Jewish confession of faith.
One portion of the Shema says: "You must love Jehovah your God with all your heart and all your soul and all your strength. "
(Deuteronomy 6:​4-9) Jesus described this as "the greatest and first commandment. "​ Matthew 22:36-​38.
Some 1,800 occurrences of the divine name, Jehovah.
Rather than prohibit the use of God’s name, the Torah contains commands that required God’s people to pronounce it.​ Numbers 6:​22-​27; Deuteronomy 6:​13; 10:8; 21:5.
Misconceptions about the Torah
Misconception: The laws of the Torah are eternal, never to be set aside.
Fact: Some Bible translations do refer to specific statutes of the Torah​ including those related to the Sabbath, the priesthood, and the Day of Atonement​ as being "perpetual " or "everlasting. " (Exodus 31:16; 40:15; Leviticus 16:33, 34, King James Version) However, the Hebrew word used in these verses can also mean lasting into the indefinite future, not necessarily lasting forever.
After the Mosaic Law covenant had been in force for about 900 years, God foretold that he would replace it with "a new covenant. "
(Jeremiah 31:31-​33) By "saying ‘a new covenant,’ [God] made the former [covenant] obsolete. "
(Hebrews 8:​7-​13) It was replaced about 2,000 years ago on the basis of the death of Jesus Christ.​ Ephesians 2:​15.
Misconception: Jewish oral traditions and the Talmud have authority equal to the written Torah.
Fact: There is no Scriptural evidence that God gave Moses an oral law to accompany the written Torah.
Instead, the Bible states: "Jehovah went on to say to Moses: ‘You are to write down these words.’ " (Exodus 34:27) The oral law, later written down and known as the Mishnah and finally expanded into the Talmud, consists of Jewish traditions that began with the Pharisees.
These traditions often conflicted with the Torah.
For this reason, Jesus told the Pharisees: "You have made the word of God invalid because of your tradition. "​ Matthew 15:​1-9.
Misconception: Women should not be taught the Torah.
Fact: The Mosaic Law included a regulation that the entire Law be read to all the people of Israel, including the women and children.
"In order that they may listen and learn about and fear Jehovah [their] God and take care to carry out all the words of [the] Law. "​ Deuteronomy 31:10-​12.
Misconception: The Torah contains hidden messages.
Fact: Moses, who recorded the Torah, stated that its message is clear and accessible to all, not hidden in a code.
(Deuteronomy 30:11-​14) The theory that there are hidden messages in the Torah is rooted in Kabbalah, or traditional Jewish mysticism, which uses "artfully contrived " methods to interpret the Scriptures. ​ 2 Peter 1:​16.
What Do Numbers Mean in the Bible?
Is Numerology Biblical?
Numbers in the Bible can often be taken literally, but they are sometimes used as symbols.
The context usually indicates whether a particular number is used as a symbol.
Consider these examples of the symbolic meaning of numbers in the Bible:
1 Unity.
For instance, Jesus prayed to God that his followers "may all be one, just as you, Father, are in union with me and I am in union with you. "​ John 17:21; Matthew 19:6.
2 In a legal setting, two witnesses verify the truth of a matter.
(Deuteronomy 17:6) Similarly, the repetition of a vision or a statement confirms the matter as sure and true.
For example, when Joseph interpreted a dream given to Pharaoh of Egypt, he said: "The fact that the dream was repeated to Pharaoh twice means that the thing is firmly established on the part of the true God. " (Genesis 41:32) In prophecy, "two horns " can represent dual rulership, as the prophet Daniel was told regarding the Medo-Persian Empire.​ Daniel 8:​20, 21; Revelation 13:11.
3 Just as three witnesses would firmly prove a matter to be true, a threefold repetition seems to establish it firmly or emphasize it.​ Ezekiel 21:27; Acts 10:​9-​16; Revelation 4:8; 8:​13.
4 This can represent completeness in form or function, as in the expression "the four corners of the earth. "​ Revelation 7:1; 21:16; Isaiah 11:12.
6 Being one less than seven, which often represents completeness, six can stand for something incomplete or imperfect or something associated with God’s enemies.​ 1 Chronicles 20:6; Daniel 3:1; Revelation 13:18.
7 This number is often used to represent the idea of completeness.
For instance, the Israelites were commanded by God to march around Jericho on seven successive days and to march around seven times on the seventh day.
(Joshua 6:​15) The Bible contains many similar examples of such a use of the number seven.
(Leviticus 4:6; 25:8; 26:18; Psalm 119:164; Revelation 1:​20; 13:1; 17:10) When Jesus told Peter that he should forgive his brother "not, Up to seven times, but, Up to seventy-seven times, " the repetition of "seven " conveyed the thought of "without limit. "​ Matthew 18:21, 22.
10 This number can stand for the entirety or aggregate of something.​ Exodus 34:28; Luke 19:13; Revelation 2:​10.
12 This number seems to represent a complete, divine arrangement.
For example, the vision of heaven given to the apostle John included a city with "twelve foundation stones, and on them the twelve names of the twelve apostles. "
(Revelation 21:14; Genesis 49:28) Multiples of 12 can have a similar meaning.​ Revelation 4:4; 7:​4-8.
40 Several judgment or punishment periods were linked with the number 40.​ Genesis 7:4; Ezekiel 29:11, 12.
Numerology and gematria
These symbolic meanings of numbers in the Bible are different from numerology, which involves looking for an occult meaning in numbers, their combinations, and numerical totals.
For example, Jewish Cabalists have analyzed the Hebrew Scriptures using a technique called gematria, which looks for a hidden code in the numerical equivalents of letters.
Numerology is a form of divination, which God condemns.​ Deuteronomy 18:10-​12.
What Does Bible Chronology Indicate About the Year 1914?
Bible chronology indicates that God’s Kingdom was established in heaven in 1914.
This is shown by a prophecy recorded in chapter 4 of the Bible book of Daniel.
Overview of the prophecy.
God caused King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon to have a prophetic dream about an immense tree that was chopped down.
Its stump was prevented from regrowing for a period of "seven times, " after which the tree would grow again.​ Daniel 4:​1, 10-​16.
The prophecy’s initial fulfillment.
The great tree represented King Nebuchadnezzar himself.
(Daniel 4:​20-​22) He was figuratively ‘chopped down’ when he temporarily lost his sanity and kingship for a period of seven years.
(Daniel 4:​25) When God restored his sanity, Nebuchadnezzar regained his throne and acknowledged God’s rulership.​ Daniel 4:​34-​36.
Evidence that the prophecy has a greater fulfillment.
The whole purpose of the prophecy was that "people living may know that the Most High is Ruler in the kingdom of mankind and that he gives it to whomever he wants, and he sets up over it even the lowliest of men. "
(Daniel 4:​17) Was proud Nebuchadnezzar the one to whom God ultimately wanted to give such rulership?
No, for God had earlier given him another prophetic dream showing that neither he nor any other political ruler would fill this role.
Instead, God would himself "set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed. "​ Daniel 2:​31-​44.
Previously, God had set up a kingdom to represent his rulership on earth: the ancient nation of Israel.
God allowed that kingdom to be made "a ruin " because its rulers had become unfaithful, but he foretold that he would give kingship to "the one who has the legal right. "
(Ezekiel 21:25-​27) The Bible identifies Jesus Christ as the one legally authorized to receive this everlasting kingdom.
(Luke 1:​30-​33) Unlike Nebuchadnezzar, Jesus is "lowly in heart, " just as it was prophesied.​ Matthew 11:29.
What does the tree of Daniel chapter 4 represent?
In the Bible, trees sometimes represent rulership.
(Ezekiel 17:22-​24; 31:​2-5) In the greater fulfillment of Daniel chapter 4, the immense tree symbolizes God’s rulership.
What does the tree’s being chopped down mean?
Just as the chopping down of the tree represented an interruption in Nebuchadnezzar’s kingship, it also represented an interruption in God’s rulership on earth.
This happened when Nebuchadnezzar destroyed Jerusalem, where the kings of Israel sat on "Jehovah’s throne " as representatives of God himself.​ 1 Chronicles 29:23.
What do the "seven times " represent?
The "seven times " represent the period during which God allowed the nations to rule over the earth without interference from any kingdom that he had set up.
The "seven times " began in October 607 B.C.E., when, according to Bible chronology, Jerusalem was destroyed by the Babylonians. ​ 2 Kings 25:​1, 8-​10.
How long are the "seven times "?
They could not be merely seven years as in Nebuchadnezzar’s case.
Jesus indicated the answer when he said that "Jerusalem [a symbol of God’s rulership] will be trampled on by the nations until the appointed times of the nations are fulfilled. "
(Luke 21:24) "The appointed times of the nations, " the period during which God allowed his rulership to be "trampled on by the nations, " are the same as the "seven times " of Daniel chapter 4.
This means that the "seven times " were still under way even when Jesus was on earth.
The Bible provides the way to determine the length of those prophetic "seven times. "
It says that three and a half "times " equal 1,260 days, so "seven times " equal twice that number, or 2,520 days.
(Revelation 12:​6, 14) Applying the prophetic rule "a day for a year, " the 2,520 days represent 2,520 years.
Therefore, the "seven times, " or 2,520 years, would end in October 1914.​ Numbers 14:34; Ezekiel 4:6.
The Book of Revelation​ What Does it Mean?
The Greek name of the Bible book of Revelation, Apokalypsis (apocalypse), means "Uncovering " or "Disclosure. "
This name indicates the meaning of Revelation​ it uncovers matters that had been hidden and discloses events that would happen long after it was written.
Many of its prophecies are yet to be fulfilled.
Overview of the book of Revelation
Introduction.​ Revelation 1:​1-9.
Messages from Jesus to the seven congregations.​ Revelation 1:10–​3:​22.
A vision of God on his throne in heaven.​ Revelation 4:1-​11.
A series of visions, each one leading into the next:
Seven seals.​ Revelation 5:1–​8:6.
Seven trumpets, the last three of which introduce three woes.​ Revelation 8:7–​14:20.
Seven bowls, each containing a plague representing a divine judgment to be poured out on the earth.​ Revelation 15:1–​16:21.
Visions of the destruction of God’s enemies.​ Revelation 17:1–​20:10.
Visions of blessings from God for heaven and earth.​ Revelation 20:11–​22:5.
Conclusion.​ Revelation 22:​6-​21.
Keys to understanding the book of Revelation
Its meaning is positive, not fearful or terrifying to those who serve God.
While many associate the word "apocalypse " with great disaster, the book of Revelation begins and ends by saying that those who read, understand, and apply its message would be happy for doing so.​ Revelation 1:3; 22:7.
Revelation uses many "signs, " or symbols, that are not to be understood literally.​ Revelation 1:1.
Many major entities and symbols in the book of Revelation are introduced earlier in the Bible:
Jehovah​ "the true God in the heavens " and Creator of all things.​ Deuteronomy 4:​39; Psalm 103:19; Revelation 4:​11; 15:3.
Jesus Christ​ "the Lamb of God. "​ John 1:​29; Revelation 5:6; 14:1.
Satan the Devil​ God’s adversary.​ Genesis 3:​14, 15; John 8:​44; Revelation 12:9.
Babylon the Great​ like ancient Babylon (Babel), an enemy of Jehovah God and his people and a source of religious lies.​ Genesis 11:​2-9; Isaiah 13:​1, 11; Revelation 17:​4-6; 18:​4, 20.
"The sea "​ wicked mankind opposed to God.​ Isaiah 57:20; Revelation 13:1; 21:1.
Features corresponding to the ancient tabernacle used for God’s worship​ including the ark of the covenant, the glassy sea (basin for washing), lamps, offerings of incense, and an altar of sacrifice.​ Exodus 25:10, 17, 18; 40:24-32; Revelation 4:​5, 6; 5:8; 8:3; 11:19.
Wild beasts​ symbolizing human governments.​ Daniel 7:​1-8, 17-​26; Revelation 13:​2, 11; 17:3.
Numbers used symbolically.​ Revelation 1:​20; 8:​13; 13:18; 21:16.
The visions apply to "the Lord’s day, " which began when God’s Kingdom was set up in 1914 and Jesus began ruling as King.
(Revelation 1:​10) We can therefore expect the main fulfillment of Revelation to be in our time.
To understand the book of Revelation, we need the same things that help us to understand the rest of the Bible, including wisdom from God and assistance from those who already understand it.​ Acts 8:​26-​39; James 1:5.
What Is New Jerusalem?
"New Jerusalem, " an expression that appears twice in the Bible, is a symbolic city that represents the group of Jesus’ followers who go to heaven to rule with him in God’s Kingdom.
(Revelation 3:​12; 21:2) The Bible shows that this group can also be called the bride of Christ.
Keys to identifying New Jerusalem
New Jerusalem is in heaven.
Each time the Bible mentions New Jerusalem, it is said to come down from heaven, where angels guard the city’s gates.
(Revelation 3:​12; 21:​2, 10, 12) Also, the city’s great size proves that it could not be on earth.
It is a cube measuring "12,000 stadia, " or "furlongs, " around.
(Revelation 21:16; King James Version) Its sides would thus be almost 560 kilometers (350 mi) high, extending into space.
New Jerusalem is made up of a group of Jesus’ followers, the bride of Christ.
New Jerusalem is called "the bride, the Lamb’s wife. "
(Revelation 21:​9, 10) In this symbolic description, the Lamb refers to Jesus Christ.
(John 1:​29; Revelation 5:​12) "The Lamb’s wife, " Christ’s bride, represents Christians who will be united with Jesus in heaven.
The Bible likens the relationship between Jesus and these Christians to that of a husband and wife.
(2 Corinthians 11:2; Ephesians 5:​23-​25) In addition, the foundation stones of New Jerusalem are inscribed with "the 12 names of the 12 apostles of the Lamb. "
(Revelation 21:14) This detail helps to confirm the identity of New Jerusalem, since Christians who are called to life in heaven are "built up on the foundation of the apostles and prophets. "​ Ephesians 2:​20.
New Jerusalem is part of a government.
Ancient Jerusalem was the capital of Israel, the place where King David, his son Solomon, and their descendants ruled "on Jehovah’s throne. " (1 Chronicles 29:23) Jerusalem, called "the holy city, " thus represented God’s rulership in the family line of David.
(Nehemiah 11:1) New Jerusalem, also called "the holy city, " is made up of those who join Jesus in heaven "to rule as kings over the earth. "​ Revelation 5:​9, 10; 21:2.
New Jerusalem brings blessings to people on earth.
New Jerusalem is depicted as "coming down out of heaven from God, " showing that God uses it to affect matters outside of heaven.
(Revelation 21:2) This expression links New Jerusalem with God’s Kingdom, which God uses to accomplish his will "as in heaven, also on earth. "
(Matthew 6:​10) God’s purpose for people on earth includes these blessings:
Removal of sin.
"A river of water of life " flows from New Jerusalem and supports "trees of life " that are "for the healing of the nations. "
(Revelation 22:​1, 2) This physical and spiritual healing will remove sin and enable people to gain perfect life, as God originally intended.​ Romans 8:​21.
Good relations between God and humankind.
Sin has alienated humans from God.
(Isaiah 59:2) The removal of sin will allow for the complete fulfillment of this prophecy: "The tent of God is with mankind, and he will reside with them, and they will be his people.
And God himself will be with them. "​ Revelation 21:3.
The end of suffering and death.
By means of his Kingdom, God "will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. "​ Revelation 21:4.
What Is the Seven-Headed Wild Beast of Revelation Chapter 13?
PThe Bible’s answer
The wild beast with seven heads introduced at Revelation 13:1 represents the worldwide political system.
It has authority, power, and a throne, which point to its being a political entity.​ Revelation 13:2.
It rules over "every tribe and people and tongue and nation, " so it is greater than a single national government.​ Revelation 13:7.
It combines features of the four beasts described in the prophecy at Daniel 7:​2-8, including the appearance of a leopard, the feet of a bear, a lion’s mouth, and ten horns.
The beasts in Daniel’s prophecy are identified as specific kings, or political kingdoms, that rule in succession over empires.
(Daniel 7:​17, 23) Thus, the wild beast of Revelation chapter 13 represents a composite political organization.
It ascends "out of the sea, " that is, from the turbulent masses of mankind that are the source of human governments.​ Revelation 13:1; Isaiah 17:12, 13.
The Bible says that the number, or name, of the beast​ 666​ is "a man’s number. "
(Revelation 13:17, 18) That expression indicates that the beast of Revelation chapter 13 is a human entity, not a spirit or demon entity.
Even though nations may agree on few things, they unite in their determination to maintain their authority rather than submit to the rule of God’s Kingdom.
(Psalm 2:2) They will also join forces to battle God’s armies commanded by Jesus Christ at Armageddon, but this war will result in the nations being destroyed.​ Revelation 16:14, 16; 19:19, 20.
"Ten horns and seven heads "
Certain numbers are used symbolically in the Bible.
For example, ten and seven represent completeness.
The key to understanding the specific meaning of the "ten horns and seven heads " of the beast of Revelation chapter 13 is an "image of the wild beast " identified later in Revelation​ a bright-red beast that has seven heads and ten horns.
(Revelation 13:​1, 14, 15; 17:3) The Bible says that the seven heads of this red beast mean "seven kings, " or governments.​ Revelation 17:​9, 10.
Likewise, the seven heads of the beast of Revelation 13:1 represent seven governments: the primary political powers that have dominated through history and have taken the lead in oppressing God’s people​ Egypt, Assyria, Babylon, Medo-Persia, Greece, Rome, and Anglo-America.
If we conclude that the ten horns represent all sovereign states, small and large, then the diadem, or crown, on each horn shows that each nation rules concurrently with the primary political power of the time.
What Is the Scarlet-Colored Beast of Revelation Chapter 17?
The scarlet-colored beast, described in Revelation chapter 17, is a symbol of the organization whose purpose is to unite and represent the nations of the world.
It first existed as the League of Nations and is now the United Nations.
Keys to identifying the scarlet-colored beast
A political entity.
The scarlet-colored beast has "seven heads " that are said to represent "seven mountains " and "seven kings, " or ruling powers.
(Revelation 17:​9, 10) Mountains and beasts are used in the Bible as symbols of governments.​ Jeremiah 51:24, 25; Daniel 2:​44, 45; 7:​17, 23.
A likeness of the worldwide political system.
The scarlet-colored beast resembles the seven-headed beast of Revelation chapter 13, which represents the worldwide political system.
Both beasts have seven heads, ten horns, and blasphemous names.
(Revelation 13:1; 17:3) These similarities are too striking to be a coincidence.
The scarlet-colored beast is an image, or likeness, of the worldwide political system.​ Revelation 13:15.
Power from other rulerships.
The scarlet-colored beast "springs from, " or owes its existence to, other ruling forces.​ Revelation 17:11, 17.
Linked with religion.
Babylon the Great, the world’s collective body of false religions, sits on the scarlet-colored beast, showing that the beast is influenced by religious groups.​ Revelation 17:​3-5.
Dishonors God.
The beast is "full of blasphemous names. "​ Revelation 17:3.
Temporarily inactive.
The scarlet-colored beast would be in "the abyss, " or inactive, for a time but would rise again.​ Revelation 17:8.
Bible prophecy fulfilled
Consider how the United Nations and its predecessor, the League of Nations, have fulfilled the Bible’s prophecy of the scarlet-colored beast.
The United Nations supports the political system by upholding "the sovereign equality of all its Members. "
In 2011, the United Nations added its 193rd member state.
Thus, it claims to represent the vast majority of nations and peoples in the world.
The United Nations owes its existence to its member nations and has only as much power and authority as they grant to it.
Both the League of Nations and the United Nations have consistently received the backing of the world’s religions.
The United Nations was established "to maintain international peace and security. "
While this goal might seem to be praiseworthy, the UN actually dishonors God by claiming to do what he has said only his Kingdom will accomplish.​ Psalm 46:9; Daniel 2:​44.
The League of Nations, which was formed shortly after World War I to maintain peace, was unable to prevent international aggression.
It ceased to function when World War II began in 1939.
In 1945, after World War II ended, the United Nations was formed.
Its purposes, methods, and structure closely resemble those of the League of Nations.
What Does 666 Mean?
According to the last book in the Bible, 666 is the number, or name, of the wild beast with seven heads and ten horns that comes out of the sea.
(Revelation 13:​1, 17, 18) This beast is a symbol of the worldwide political system, which rules over "every tribe and people and tongue and nation. "
(Revelation 13:7) The name 666 identifies the political system as a gross failure in God’s sight.
More than a label.
Names given by God have meaning.
For example, God gave the man Abram, which means "Father Is High (Exalted), " the name Abraham, which means "Father of a Crowd (Multitude), " when God promised that He would make Abraham "a father of many nations. " (Genesis 17:5, footnotes) Likewise, God named the beast 666 as a symbol of its defining attributes.
The number six implies imperfection.
Often, numbers are used as symbols in the Bible.
Seven typically represents completeness or perfection.
Six, being one short of seven, can denote something incomplete or flawed in God’s eyes, and it can be associated with God’s enemies.​ 1 Chronicles 20:6; Daniel 3:1.
Three times for emphasis.
The Bible sometimes stresses a matter by stating it three times.
(Revelation 4:8; 8:​13) So the name 666 powerfully emphasizes that God views human political systems as gross failures.
They have been unable to bring lasting peace and security​ things that only God’s Kingdom will achieve.
The mark of the beast
The Bible says that people receive "the mark of the wild beast " because they follow it "with admiration, " to the point of worshipping it.
(Revelation 13:​3, 4; 16:2) They do this by giving worshipful honor to their country, its symbols, or its military might.
As The Encyclopedia of Religion states: "Nationalism has become a dominant form of religion in the modern world. "
How is the mark of the beast placed on someone’s right hand or forehead?
(Revelation 13:16) Regarding his commands to the nation of Israel, God said: "Bind them as a reminder on your hand, and they should be like a headband on your forehead. " (Deuteronomy 11:18) This meant, not that the Israelites were to mark their literal hands and foreheads, but that God’s words would guide all their actions and thoughts.
Likewise, rather than being something literal such as a 666 tattoo, the mark of the beast symbolically identifies those who let the political system rule their lives.
Those with the mark of the beast place themselves in opposition to God.​ Revelation 14:​9, 10; 19:19-​21.
What Is Babylon the Great?
Babylon the Great, described in the book of Revelation, is the world’s collective body of false religions, which God rejects.
(Revelation 14:8; 17:5; 18:21) Although those religions differ in many respects, in one way or another they all lead people away from the worship of the true God, Jehovah.​ Deuteronomy 4:​35.
Keys to identifying Babylon the Great
Babylon the Great is a symbol.
The Bible describes her as "a woman " and a "great prostitute, " having a name that is "a mystery: ‘Babylon the Great.’ " (Revelation 17:​1, 3, 5) The book of Revelation is presented "in signs, " so it is reasonable to conclude that Babylon the Great is a symbol, not a literal woman.
(Revelation 1:1) In addition, she "sits on many waters, " which represent "peoples and crowds and nations and tongues. "
(Revelation 17:​1, 15) A literal woman could not do that.
Babylon the Great represents an international entity.
She is called "the great city that has a kingdom over the kings of the earth. "
(Revelation 17:18) Thus, she has international scope and influence.
Babylon the Great is a religious entity, not a political or commercial one.
Ancient Babylon was a profoundly religious city, known for its use of spiritistic "spells " and "sorceries. "
(Isaiah 47:​1, 12, 13; Jeremiah 50:​1, 2, 38) In fact, false religion in opposition to the true God, Jehovah, was practiced there.
(Genesis 10:​8, 9; 11:​2-4, 8) The rulers of Babylon arrogantly exalted themselves above Jehovah and his worship.
(Isaiah 14:​4, 13, 14; Daniel 5:​2-4, 23) Likewise, Babylon the Great is known for her "spiritistic practices. "
That shows her to be a religious organization.​ Revelation 18:23.
Babylon the Great cannot be a political entity, because "the kings of the earth " mourn her destruction.
(Revelation 17:​1, 2; 18:9) Neither is she a commercial power, because the Bible distinguishes her from "the merchants of the earth. "​ Revelation 18:11, 15.
Stela of Babylonian King Nabonidus with symbols of the triad of gods Sin, Ishtar, and Shamash
Babylon the Great fits the profile of false religion.
Rather than teaching people how to draw closer to the true God, Jehovah, false religion actually leads them to worship other gods.
The Bible calls this "spiritual prostitution. " (Leviticus 20:6; Exodus 34:15, 16) Beliefs such as the Trinity and the immortality of the soul and practices such as the use of images in worship date back to ancient Babylon and continue to permeate false religion.
These religions also blend their worship with love for the world.
The Bible refers to this form of unfaithfulness as spiritual adultery.​ James 4:4.
False religion’s wealth and showy display of it match the picture that the Bible paints of Babylon the Great, who is "clothed in purple and scarlet " and "adorned with gold and precious stones and pearls. "
(Revelation 17:4) Babylon the Great is the source of "the disgusting things of the earth, " or the teachings and actions that actually dishonor God.
(Revelation 17:5) The members of false religion are the "peoples and crowds and nations and tongues " who support Babylon the Great.​ Revelation 17:15.
Babylon the Great is responsible for the deaths "of all those who have been slaughtered on the earth. "
(Revelation 18:24) Throughout history, false religion has not only fomented wars and fueled acts of terrorism but has also failed to teach people the truth about Jehovah, the God of love.
(1 John 4:8) This failure has contributed to much bloodshed.
For good reason, those who want to please God must "get out of her, " separating themselves from false religion.​ Revelation 18:4; 2 Corinthians 6:​14-​17.
What Is the Lake of Fire?
Is It the Same as Hell or Gehenna?
The lake of fire is a symbol of eternal destruction.
It is the same as Gehenna, but it is different from hell, which is the common grave of mankind.
Not a literal lake
The five Bible verses that mention "the lake of fire " show it to be a symbol rather than a literal lake.
(Revelation 19:20; 20:10, 14, 15; 21:8) The following are cast into the lake of fire:
The Devil.
(Revelation 20:10) As a spirit creature, the Devil cannot be harmed by literal fire.​ Exodus 3:2; Judges 13:20.
Death.
(Revelation 20:14) This is not a literal entity but represents a state of inactivity, the absence of life. (Ecclesiastes 9:​10) Death cannot literally be burned.
"The wild beast " and "the false prophet. "
(Revelation 19:20) Since these are symbols, doesn’t it seem reasonable to conclude that the lake they are thrown into is also a symbol?​ Revelation 13:11, 12; 16:13.
A symbol of eternal destruction
The Bible says that the lake of fire "means the second death. "
(Revelation 20:14; 21:8) The first kind of death mentioned in the Bible resulted from Adam’s sin.
This death can be reversed by resurrection and will eventually be eliminated by God.​ 1 Corinthians 15:21, 22, 26.
There is no release from the symbolic lake of fire
The lake of fire represents a different, or second, kind of death.
Although it too represents a state of total inactivity, it is different in that the Bible says nothing about a resurrection from the second death.
For example, the Bible says that Jesus has "the keys of hell and of death, " showing that he has the authority to release people from the death brought by Adam’s sin.
(Revelation 1:​18; 20:13, King James Version) However, neither Jesus nor anyone else has a key to the lake of fire.
That symbolic lake represents eternal punishment in the form of permanent destruction.​ 2 Thessalonians 1:9.
Identical to Gehenna, the Valley of Hinnom
Gehenna (Greek geenna) is mentioned 12 times in the Bible.
Like the lake of fire, it is a symbol of eternal destruction.
Although some translations render this word as "hell, " Gehenna is different from hell (Hebrew sheohl, Greek haides).
The ancient valley of Hinnom outside the wall of Jerusalem with a fire constantly burning
The Valley of Hinnom
The word "Gehenna " literally means "Valley of Hinnom, " referring to a valley just outside Jerusalem.
In Bible times, the city residents used this valley as a garbage dump.
They kept a fire constantly burning there to destroy refuse; maggots consumed anything that the fire did not reach.
Jesus used Gehenna as a symbol of everlasting destruction.
(Matthew 23:33) He said that in Gehenna "the maggot does not die and the fire is not put out. "
(Mark 9:​47, 48) He thus alluded to the conditions in the Valley of Hinnom and also to the prophecy at Isaiah 66:24, which says: "They will go out and look on the carcasses of the men who rebelled against me; for the worms on them will not die, and their fire will not be extinguished. "
Jesus’ illustration describes, not torture, but complete annihilation.
The worms and fire consume carcasses, or dead bodies, not living people.
The Bible gives no indication of any return from Gehenna.
"The lake of fire " and "the fiery Gehenna " both represent permanent, everlasting destruction.​ Revelation 20:14, 15; 21:8; Matthew 18:9.
How "tormented day and night forever and ever "?
If the lake of fire is a symbol of destruction, why does the Bible say that in it the Devil, the wild beast, and the false prophet "will be tormented day and night forever and ever "?
(Revelation 20:10) Consider four reasons why this torment does not refer to literal torture:
For the Devil to be tortured eternally, he would have to be kept alive forever.
However, the Bible says that he will be brought to nothing, or put out of existence.​ Hebrews 2:​14.
Everlasting life is a gift from God, not a punishment.​ Romans 6:​23.
The wild beast and the false prophet are symbols and cannot experience literal torture.
The context of the Bible indicates that the torment of the Devil is everlasting restraint or destruction.
The word used for "torment " in the Bible can also mean "a condition of restraint. "
For example, the Greek word for "tormentors " used at Matthew 18:34 is rendered as "jailers " in many translations, showing the connection between the words "torment " and "restraint. "
Likewise, the parallel accounts at Matthew 8:​29 and Luke 8:​30, 31 equate "torment " with "the abyss, " a figurative place of complete inactivity or death.
(Romans 10:7; Revelation 20:​1, 3) In fact, several times the book of Revelation uses the word "torment " in a symbolic sense.​ Revelation 9:5; 11:10; 18:​7, 10.
What Is the Great Tribulation?
The great tribulation will bring the greatest time of trouble ever to come upon mankind.
According to Bible prophecy, it will occur during "the last days, " or "the end time. " (2 Timothy 3:1; Daniel 12:4, New American Bible) It will be "a tribulation such as has not occurred from the beginning of the creation that God created until that time, and will not occur again. "​ Mark 13:19; Daniel 12:1; Matthew 24:21, 22.
Events during the great tribulation
Destruction of false religion.
With surprising speed, false religion will be destroyed.
(Revelation 17:​1, 5; 18:​9, 10, 21) The political powers represented by the United Nations will carry out God’s will in taking this action.​ Revelation 17:​3, 15-​18.
Attack on true religion.
A coalition of nations, referred to in Ezekiel’s vision as "Gog of the land of Magog, " will try to annihilate those who practice true religion.
However, God will protect his worshippers from destruction.​ Ezekiel 38:​1, 2, 9-​12, 18-​23.
Judgment of earth’s inhabitants.
Jesus will judge all mankind and "will separate people one from another, just as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats. "
(Matthew 25:31-​33) The basis for his judgment will be the support, or lack of support, that each person gave to Jesus’ "brothers, " those who will rule with him in heaven.​ Matthew 25:34-​46.
Gathering of Kingdom rulers.
Faithful ones who have been chosen to rule with Christ will finish their earthly course and be resurrected to life in heaven.​ Matthew 24:31; 1 Corinthians 15:50-​53; 1 Thessalonians 4:​15-​17.
Armageddon.
This "war of the great day of God the Almighty " is also called "the day of Jehovah. "
(Revelation 16:14, 16; Isaiah 13:9; 2 Peter 3:​12) Those judged adversely by Christ will be destroyed.
(Zephaniah 1:​18; 2 Thessalonians 1:​6-​10) This will include the destruction of the worldwide political system, pictured in the Bible by a seven-headed wild beast.​ Revelation 19:19-​21.
Events after the great tribulation
Confinement of Satan and the demons.
A great angel will hurl Satan and the demons "into the abyss, " a symbol of deathlike inactivity.
(Revelation 20:​1-3) Satan’s condition in the abyss could be likened to being in prison; he will be unable to influence affairs elsewhere.​ Revelation 20:7.
The Millennium begins.
God’s Kingdom will begin its 1,000-year reign, which will bring great blessings to mankind.
(Revelation 5:​9, 10; 20:​4, 6) An unnumbered "great crowd " will "come out of the great tribulation, " surviving it to see the start of the Millennium on earth.​ Revelation 7:​9, 14; Psalm 37:​9-​11.
What Is the Battle of Armageddon?
The battle of Armageddon refers to the final war between human governments and God.
These governments and their supporters oppose God even now by refusing to submit to his rulership.
(Psalm 2:2) The battle of Armageddon will bring human rulership to an end.​ Daniel 2:​44.
The word "Armageddon " occurs only once in the Bible, at Revelation 16:16.
Prophetically, Revelation shows that at "the place that is called in Hebrew Armageddon, " "the kings of the entire inhabited earth " will be gathered "together to the war of the great day of God the Almighty. "​ Revelation 16:14.
Who will fight at Armageddon?
Jesus Christ will lead a heavenly army to victory over God’s enemies.
(Revelation 19:11-​16, 19-​21) These enemies include those who oppose God’s authority and who treat God with contempt.​ Ezekiel 39:7.
Will Armageddon literally be fought in the Middle East?
Rather than being restricted to one area, the battle of Armageddon will encompass the whole earth.​ Jeremiah 25:32-​34; Ezekiel 39:17-​20.
Armageddon, sometimes rendered "Har–​Magedon " (Hebrew Har Meghiddohn), means "Mountain of Megiddo. "
Megiddo was once a city in the territory of ancient Israel.
History tells of decisive battles that were fought in its vicinity, including some that are recorded in the Bible.
(Judges 5:​19, 20; 2 Kings 9:​27; 23:29) However, Armageddon cannot refer to the literal area near ancient Megiddo.
There is no large mountain there, and even the entire adjoining Low Plain of Jezreel could not contain all those who will fight against God.
Instead, Armageddon is the worldwide situation in which the nations assemble in their last stand against rule by God.
What will conditions be like during the battle of Armageddon?
While we do not know how God will use his power, he will have at his disposal weapons such as those he has used in the past​ hail, earthquake, flooding downpour, fire and sulfur, lightning, and disease.
(Job 38:22, 23; Ezekiel 38:19, 22; Habakkuk 3:​10, 11; Zechariah 14:12) In confusion, at least some of God’s enemies will kill each other, yet they will ultimately realize that it is God who is fighting against them.​ Ezekiel 38:21, 23; Zechariah 14:13.
Will Armageddon be the end of the world?
It will not be the end of our planet, since the earth is mankind’s eternal home.
(Psalm 37:29; 96:10; Ecclesiastes 1:4) Rather than destroying humanity, Armageddon actually saves it, because "a great crowd " of God’s servants will survive.​ Revelation 7:​9, 14; Psalm 37:34.
Besides referring to the earth, though, the word "world " in the Bible sometimes refers to wicked human society opposed to God.
(1 John 2:​15-​17) In this sense, Armageddon will bring "the end of the world. "​ Matthew 24:3, King James Version.
When will Armageddon take place?
When discussing the "great tribulation " that culminates in the battle of Armageddon, Jesus said: "Concerning that day and hour nobody knows, neither the angels of the heavens nor the Son, but only the Father. "
(Matthew 24:21, 36) Nevertheless, the Bible does show that Armageddon takes place during Jesus’ invisible presence, which began in 1914.​ Matthew 24:37-​39.
Will the Earth Be Destroyed?
No, planet Earth will never be destroyed, burned in fire, or replaced.
The Bible teaches that God created the earth to be inhabited forever.
"The righteous will possess the earth, and they will live forever on it. "​ Psalm 37:29.
"[God] has established the earth on its foundations; it will not be moved from its place forever and ever. "​ Psalm 104:5.
"The earth remains forever. "​ Ecclesiastes 1:4.
"The One who formed the earth, its Maker who firmly established it, . . . did not create it simply for nothing, but formed it to be inhabited. "​ Isaiah 45:18.
Will humans ruin the earth?
God will not allow humans to ruin the earth completely by pollution, warfare, or any other means.
Rather, he will "bring to ruin those ruining the earth. "
(Revelation 11:18) How will he accomplish that?
God will replace human governments, which have been unable to protect the earth, with a perfect heavenly Kingdom.
(Daniel 2:​44; Matthew 6:​9, 10) That Kingdom will be ruled by God’s Son, Jesus Christ.
(Isaiah 9:​6, 7) When on earth, Jesus exercised miraculous powers over natural elements.
(Mark 4:​35-​41) As the King of God’s Kingdom, Jesus will exercise full control over earth and its elements.
He will re-create, or renew, conditions on earth, making them similar to those that existed in the garden of Eden.​ Matthew 19:28; Luke 23:43.
Doesn’t the Bible teach that the earth will be burned in fire?
No, it does not.
Such a misconception often comes from a misunderstanding of 2 Peter 3:7, which says: "The heavens and the earth that now exist are reserved for fire. "
Consider two important points that help us understand the meaning of those words:
The Bible uses the terms "heavens, " "earth, " and "fire " to refer to more than one thing.
For example, Genesis 11:1 says: "All the earth continued to be of one language. "
Here, "earth " refers to human society.
The context of 2 Peter 3:7 indicates the meaning of the heavens, earth, and fire mentioned there.
Verses 5 and 6 draw a parallel with the Flood of Noah’s day.
On that occasion, an ancient world was destroyed, yet our planet did not disappear.
Instead, the Flood wiped out a violent society, or "earth. "
(Genesis 6:​11) It also destroyed a kind of "heavens "​ the people who ruled over that earthly society.
Thus, wicked people were destroyed, not our planet.
Noah and his family survived the destruction of that world and inhabited the earth after the Flood.​ Genesis 8:​15-​18.
Similar to the waters of the Flood, the destruction, or "fire, " of 2 Peter 3:7 will bring an end to the world of wicked people, not to planet Earth.
God promises "new heavens and a new earth " in which "righteousness is to dwell. " (2 Peter 3:​13) A "new earth, " or new human society, will be ruled over by "new heavens, " or new leadership​ God’s Kingdom.
Under the rule of that Kingdom, the earth will become a peaceful paradise.​ Revelation 21:​1-4.
When Will the World End?
To know when the end of the world will happen, it is necessary to understand how the Bible uses the term "world. "
The Greek word kosmos, usually translated "world, " most often refers to the world of humankind, especially the part that is out of harmony with God and his will.
(John 15:18, 19; 2 Peter 2:5) At times, kosmos refers to the framework of human society.​ 1 Corinthians 7:​31; 1 John 2:​15, 16.
What is "the end of the world "?
The phrase "the end of the world, " which appears in many Bible translations, can also be rendered as "the conclusion of the system of things, " or "the close of the age. "
(Matthew 24:3; English Standard Version) It refers, not to the destruction of the earth or of all humanity, but to the end of the framework of human society.​ 1 John 2:​17.
The Bible teaches that "evil men will be done away with " so that good people can enjoy life on earth.
(Psalm 37:​9-​11) This destruction will happen at the "great tribulation, " which culminates in the war of Armageddon.​ Matthew 24:21, 22; Revelation 16:14, 16.
When will the world end?
Jesus said: "Concerning that day and hour nobody knows, neither the angels of the heavens nor the Son, but only the Father. "
(Matthew 24:36, 42) He added that the timing of the end would be unexpected, "at an hour that you do not think to be it. "​ Matthew 24:44.
Even though we cannot know the exact day and hour, Jesus did provide a composite "sign, " or group of events, that would identify the time period leading up to the end of the world.
(Matthew 24:​3, 7-​14) The Bible refers to this period as "the time of the end, " "the end times, " and "the last days. "​ Daniel 12:4; God’s Word Bible; 2 Timothy 3:​1-5.
Will there be anything left after the end of the world?
The earth will still be here, for the Bible says that "it will not be moved from its place forever and ever. "
(Psalm 104:5) And the earth will be filled with people, just as the Bible promises: "The righteous will possess the earth, and they will live forever on it. "
(Psalm 37:29) God will bring about the conditions that he originally purposed:
Paradise.​ Isaiah 35:1; Luke 23:43.
Security and prosperity.​ Micah 4:4.
Meaningful and satisfying work for all.​ Isaiah 65:21-​23.
Freedom from disease and aging.​ Job 33:25; Isaiah 33:24.
People in paradise enjoy a day at the beach
What Will God’s Kingdom Accomplish?
God’s Kingdom will replace all human governments and rule over the entire earth.
(Daniel 2:44; Revelation 16:14) Once that happens, God’s Kingdom will . . .
Remove the wicked, whose selfishness harms us all.
"As regards the wicked, they will be cut off from the very earth. "
Proverbs 2:22.
End all wars.
"[God] is making wars to cease to the extremity of the earth. "
Psalm 46:9.
Bring prosperity and security to the earth.
"Everyone will live in peace among their own vineyards and fig trees, and no one will make them afraid. "
Micah 4:4, Good News Translation.
Make the earth into a paradise.
"Thirsty deserts will be glad; barren lands will celebrate and blossom with flowers. "
Isaiah 35:1, Contemporary English Version.
Provide everyone with meaningful, enjoyable work.
"The work of their own hands [God’s] chosen ones will use to the full.
They will not toil for nothing. "
Isaiah 65:21-23.
Eliminate disease.
"No resident will say: ‘I am sick.’
Set us free from the aging process.
"Let his flesh become fresher than in youth; let him return to the days of his youthful vigor. "
Job 33:25.
Bring the dead back to life.
"All those in the memorial tombs will hear [Jesus’] voice and come out. "
Peace on Earth How Will It Come?
Peace on earth will come, not by human efforts, but by means of God’s Kingdom, a heavenly government ruled by Christ Jesus.
Notice how the Bible teaches us about this wonderful hope.
God will make "wars to cease to the extremity of the earth, " fulfilling his promise to bring "peace on earth to those with whom he is pleased! "
Psalm 46:9; Luke 2:14, Good News Translation.
God’s Kingdom will rule from heaven over the entire earth.
(Daniel 7:14) As a world government, it will eliminate nationalism, which is at the root of many conflicts.
Jesus, the Ruler of God’s Kingdom, is called the "Prince of Peace, " and he will ensure that "to peace there will be no end. "
Isaiah 9:6, 7.
People determined to keep fighting will not be allowed to live under the Kingdom, since "anyone loving violence [God’s] soul certainly hates. "
Psalm 11:5; Proverbs 2:22.
God teaches his subjects how to live in peace.
Describing the results of this instruction, the Bible says: "They will have to beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears. Nation will not lift up sword against nation, neither will they learn war anymore. "
Isaiah 2:3, 4.
Already, millions of Jehovah’s Witnesses around the world are learning from God how to be peaceable.
(Matthew 5:9) Although we belong to many different ethnic groups and live in over 230 different lands, we refuse to take up arms against our fellow man.
Jehovah’s Witnesses are learning the ways of peace today
Who Were the "Three Wise Men "?
Did They Follow the "Star " of Bethlehem?
Contrary to popular Christmas tradition, the Bible does not use the terms "three wise men " or "three kings " to describe the travelers who went to see Jesus after his birth.
(Matthew 2:1) Instead, the Gospel writer Matthew used the Greek word ma’goi to describe those who visited Jesus.
The word likely refers to experts in astrology and other occult practices.
A number of Bible translations call them "astrologers " or "magi. "
How many "wise men " were there?
Were the "wise men " kings?
What were the names of the "wise men "?
When did the "wise men " visit Jesus?
Did God have the "wise men " follow the "star " of Bethlehem?
The Bible does not say, and traditions about their number vary.
According to the Encyclopedia Britannica, "Eastern tradition sets the number of Magi at 12, but Western tradition sets their number at three, probably based on the three gifts of ‘gold, frankincense, and myrrh’ (Matthew 2:11) presented to the infant. "
Although in Christmas tradition the visitors are often depicted that way, nowhere does the Bible call them kings.
According to the Encyclopedia Britannica, that designation was added centuries later as part of the traditions that "embellished the narrative. "
The Bible does not reveal the names of the astrologers.
According to The International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, "attempts to name them (e.g., Gaspar, Melchior, and Balthasar) rest upon legends. "
The astrologers may have visited Jesus a number of months after his birth.
This is evident because King Herod, who wanted to have Jesus killed, ordered the slaughter of boys who were two years old and younger.
He based that age range on information he had received from the astrologers.
Matthew 2:16.
The astrologers did not visit Jesus on the night of his birth.
The Bible says: "When they went into the house, they saw the young child with Mary his mother. "
(Matthew 2:11) This indicates that the family were by then living in a house and that Jesus was no longer an infant in a manger.
Luke 2:16.
Some people believe that God sent the so-called star of Bethlehem to guide the astrologers to Jesus.
Consider why that cannot be the case.
What appeared to be a star led the astrologers first to Jerusalem.
The Bible says: "Astrologers from the East came to Jerusalem, saying: ‘Where is the one born king of the Jews?
For we saw his star when we were in the East, and we have come to do obeisance to him.’
" Matthew 2:1, 2.
King Herod, not the "star, " was the first to direct the astrologers to Bethlehem.
When he heard of a rival "king of the Jews, " Herod investigated where the promised Christ was to be born.
(Matthew 2:3-6) On learning that it was to be in Bethlehem, he told the astrologers to go there, look for the child, and report back to him.
Only then did the astrologers go to Bethlehem.
The Bible says: "After they had heard the king, they went their way, and look! the star they had seen when they were in the East went ahead of them until it came to a stop above where the young child was. "
Matthew 2:9.
The appearance of the "star " set in motion events that threatened the life of Jesus and resulted in the murder of innocent children.
When the astrologers left Bethlehem, God warned them not to return to Herod.
Matthew 2:12.
How did Herod react?
The Bible says: "Herod, seeing that he had been outwitted by the astrologers, flew into a great rage, and he sent out and had all the boys in Bethlehem and in all its districts killed, from two years of age and under, according to the time that he had carefully ascertained from the astrologers. "
(Matthew 2:16) God would not have caused such a wicked thing to be done.
Job 34:10.
Who Was Cain’s Wife?
Cain, the eldest child of the first human couple, married one of his sisters or another close female relative.
This conclusion may be drawn by considering what the Bible says about Cain and his family.
Facts about Cain and his family
All humans descended from Adam and Eve.
God "made out of one man [Adam] every nation of men to dwell on the entire surface of the earth. "
(Acts 17:26) Adam’s wife, Eve, became "the mother of everyone living. " (Genesis 3:​20) Therefore, Cain must have married a fellow descendant of Adam and Eve.
Cain and his brother Abel were the first of a number of children born to Eve.
(Genesis 4:​1, 2) When Cain was banished for killing his brother, he complained: "Anyone who finds me will certainly kill me. " (Genesis 4:​14) Of whom was Cain afraid?
The Bible says that Adam "became father to sons and daughters. " (Genesis 5:4) Evidently, these other descendants of Adam and Eve could have posed a threat to Cain.
Early in human history, marrying one’s relative was not uncommon.
The faithful man Abraham, for example, married his half sister.
(Genesis 20:12) The first prohibitions against such marriage appeared in the Mosaic Law, which was codified centuries after Cain’s day.
(Leviticus 18:​9, 12, 13) It seems that children born to close relatives back then were not as prone to birth defects as they are today.
The Bible presents the account of Adam, Eve, and their family as accurate history.
Detailed genealogies going back to Adam can be found not only in the book of Genesis, written by Moses, but also in the writings of the historians Ezra and Luke.
(Genesis 5:​3-5; 1 Chronicles 1:​1-4; Luke 3:​38) Bible writers cite the story of Cain as a historical event.​ Hebrews 11:4; 1 John 3:​12; Jude 11.
What Is the Ark of the Covenant?
The ark of the covenant was a sacred chest made by the ancient Israelites according to the command and design of God.
It housed and protected "the Testimony, " the Ten Commandments written on two stone tablets.​ Exodus 25:​8-​10, 16; 31:18.
Construction.
The Ark measured 2.5 cubits long, 1.5 cubits wide, and 1.5 cubits high (111 x 67 x 67 cm; 44 x 26 x 26 in.).
It was built of acacia wood and was overlaid inside and out with gold, with an artistic border.
Its cover, made of solid gold, featured two golden cherubs, one at each end.
They faced each other with their faces toward the cover and their wings extending upward, overshadowing the cover.
The Ark had four rings of cast gold above its feet.
Acacia-wood poles overlaid with gold were put through the rings and were used for carrying the Ark.​ Exodus 25:10-​21; 37:​6-9.
Location.
The Ark was initially kept in the Most Holy compartment of the tabernacle, a transportable tent of worship that was made at the same time as the Ark.
The Most Holy was screened off from the view of the priests and the people.
(Exodus 40:​3, 21) Only the high priest could enter this compartment, one day each year on Atonement Day, and see the Ark.
(Leviticus 16:2; Hebrews 9:7) Later, the Ark was moved to the Most Holy in Solomon’s temple.​ 1 Kings 6:​14, 19.
The ark of the covenant inside the Most Holy compartment of the tabernacle
Purpose.
The Ark was an archive for sacred items that would remind the Israelites of the covenant, or agreement, that God had made with them at Mount Sinai.
It also played a key role in the Atonement Day ceremony.​ Leviticus 16:​3, 13-17.
Contents.
The stone tablets inscribed with the Ten Commandments were the first items placed in the Ark.
(Exodus 40:20) A golden jar of manna and "Aaron’s rod that budded " were later added.
(Hebrews 9:4; Exodus 16:33, 34; Numbers 17:10) Evidently, the jar and rod were removed at some point, because they were not in the Ark when it was moved into the temple.​ 1 Kings 8:9.
Transport.
The Ark was to be carried by the Levites on their shoulders by means of the acacia-wood poles.
(Numbers 7:9; 1 Chronicles 15:15) The poles remained attached to the Ark at all times, so the Levites never had to touch the Ark.
(Exodus 25:12-​16) "The screening curtain " that separated the Holy and the Most Holy was used to cover the Ark while it was being carried.​ Numbers 4:​5, 6.
Symbolism.
The Ark was associated with God’s presence.
For example, the cloud that appeared over the Ark in the Most Holy and at Israelite encampments was a sign of Jehovah’s presence and blessing.
(Leviticus 16:2; Numbers 10:33-​36) Also, the Bible says that Jehovah "[sat] enthroned above the cherubs, " referring to the two cherubs on the Ark’s cover.
(1 Samuel 4:4; Psalm 80:1) Thus, these cherubs were "the representation of the chariot " of Jehovah.
(1 Chronicles 28:18) Because of what the Ark symbolized, King David could write that Jehovah was "dwelling in Zion " after the Ark was moved there.​ Psalm 9:​11.
Designations.
The Bible uses a variety of terms for that sacred chest, including "the ark of the Testimony, " "the ark of the covenant, " "the Ark of Jehovah, " and "the Ark of your [Jehovah’s] strength. "​ Numbers 7:​89; Joshua 3:​6, 13; 2 Chronicles 6:​41.
The cover of the Ark was called "the propitiatory cover, " or "the mercy seat. " (1 Chronicles 28:11; King James Version) This term refers to the special function of the cover on the Day of Atonement, when the high priest of Israel would spatter the blood of sacrificed animals toward and before the cover.
These actions of the high priest made propitiation for, or covered, sins "in behalf of himself and his house and in behalf of the entire congregation of Israel. "​ Leviticus 16:14-​17.
Does the ark of the covenant exist today?
There is no evidence that it does.
The Bible shows that the Ark is no longer needed because the covenant associated with it has been replaced with "a new covenant, " one based on Jesus’ sacrifice.
(Jeremiah 31:31-​33; Hebrews 8:​13; 12:24) The Bible thus foretold a time when the ark of the covenant would be no more, yet God’s people would not miss it.​ Jeremiah 3:​16.
In a vision given to the apostle John after the new covenant was established, the ark of the covenant appeared in heaven.
(Revelation 11:15, 19) This symbolic Ark represents God’s presence and his blessing on the new covenant.
Did the Ark serve as a sort of magic charm?
Possessing the ark of the covenant did not guarantee success.
For example, the Israelites had the Ark in their camp when battling the city of Ai, yet they suffered defeat because of one Israelite’s unfaithfulness.
(Joshua 7:​1-6) Later, they were defeated by the Philistines despite taking the ark of the covenant to the battlefield.
That conquest was due to the wickedness of the Israelite priests Hophni and Phinehas.
(1 Samuel 2:​12; 4:​1-​11) The Philistines captured the Ark in that battle, but God struck them with plagues until they returned it to Israel.​ 1 Samuel 5:11–6:​5.
History of the ark of the covenant
Year (B.C.E.)
Event
1513
Made by Bezalel and his assistants using materials contributed by the Israelites.​ Exodus 25:​1, 2; 37:1.
1512
Inaugurated by Moses along with the tabernacle and priesthood.​ Exodus 40:​1-3, 9, 20, 21.
1512​ After 1070
Moved to various locations.​ Joshua 18:1; Judges 20:26, 27; 1 Samuel 1:​24; 3:3; 6:​11-​14; 7:​1, 2.
After 1070
Brought to Jerusalem by King David.​ 2 Samuel 6:​12.
1026
Moved into Solomon’s temple in Jerusalem.​ 1 Kings 8:​1, 6.
642
Returned to the temple by King Josiah.​ 2 Chronicles 35:3.
Before 607
Apparently removed from the temple. It is not mentioned in the inventories of articles taken to Babylon when the temple was destroyed in 607 B.C.E. or of those articles later returned to Jerusalem.​ 2 Kings 25:13-​17; Ezra 1:​7-​11.
63
Declared to be missing by Roman General Pompey when he conquered Jerusalem and inspected the Most Holy of the temple.
Can the Bible Help Me to Have a Happy Family?
Here’s a sample of wise advice based on the Bible that has helped millions of men and women to gain family happiness:
Legalize your marriage.
The lifetime commitment of a legal marriage is the foundation for a happy family.​ Matthew 19:4-6.
Show love and respect.
This includes treating your mate in the way that you would like to be treated.​ Matthew 7:12; Ephesians 5:25, 33.
Avoid harsh words.
Speak kindly, even if your mate says or does something hurtful.
(Ephesians 4:31, 32) As the Bible says at Proverbs 15:1: "An answer, when mild, turns away rage, but a word causing pain makes anger to come up. "
Be faithful to each other.
Reserve your romantic and sexual attention only for your spouse.
(Matthew 5:28) The Bible says: "Let marriage be honorable among all, and the marriage bed be without defilement. "​ Hebrews 13:4.
Train your children with love.
Avoid both leniency and harshness.​ Proverbs 29:15; Colossians 3:21.
Is Money the Root of All Evil?
The Bible does not say that money is evil, nor does it identify money as the underlying cause of all bad things.
The common expression "money is the root of all evil " is an incomplete and misleading Bible quotation.
The Bible actually says that "the love of money is the root of all evil. " 1 Timothy 6:10, King James Version, emphasis ours.
What does the Bible say about money?
Why does the Bible warn about the love of money?
How can we benefit from the Bible’s advice on money?
Bible verses about money
The Bible acknowledges that money, when used wisely, can be useful, even serving as "a protection. "
(Ecclesiastes 7:12) Additionally, the Bible commends those who show generosity toward others, which may include monetary gifts.
Proverbs 11:25.
At the same time, the Bible cautions against making money the focus of life.
It says: "Let your way of life be free of the love of money, while you are content with the present things. "
(Hebrews 13:5) The lesson is to keep money in its place and not pursue wealth.
Instead, we should aim to be content with the things we really need, such as food, clothing, and shelter.
1 Timothy 6:8.
Greedy people will not gain everlasting life.
(Ephesians 5:5) For one thing, greed is a form of idolatry, or false worship.
(Colossians 3:5) For another, in their effort to get what they desire, the greedy often abandon good principles.
Those "hastening to get rich will not remain innocent, " says Proverbs 28:20.
They might even be tempted to commit crimes, such as blackmail, extortion, fraud, kidnapping, or murder.
Even if the love of money does not lead to bad behavior, it can have other negative consequences.
The Bible says that "those who are determined to be rich fall into temptation and a snare and many senseless and harmful desires. " 1 Timothy 6:9.
If we do not compromise moral and spiritual values for the sake of money, we will have self-respect along with God’s favor and support.
To those who sincerely try to please him, God promises: "I will never leave you, and I will never abandon you. "
(Hebrews 13:5, 6) He also assures us that "a faithful man will receive many blessings. "
Proverbs 28:20.
Bible Verses About Money
Ecclesiastes 7:12: "Money is a protection. "
Meaning: When used wisely, money can be beneficial because it adds a measure of security.
Luke 12:15: "Even when a person has an abundance, his life does not result from the things he possesses. "
Meaning: Money is not the most important thing in life, and it will not contribute to our salvation.
1 Timothy 6:10: "The love of money is a root of all sorts of injurious things, and by reaching out for this love some have been led astray from the faith and have stabbed themselves all over with many pains. "
Meaning: Money in itself is not wrong.
But people who love money who make it their main focus in life bring problems on themselves, such as broken families and poor health from overwork.
Hebrews 13:5: "Let your way of life be free of the love of money, while you are content with the present things. "
Meaning: Instead of pursuing wealth at all costs, we are wise to be content with what we really need.
Matthew 19:24: "It is easier for a camel to get through a needle’s eye than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of God. "
Meaning: Jesus had just invited a rich young man to follow him.
The man refused because he was too attached to his possessions.
So Jesus was giving a warning.
A person who puts riches before God risks losing everlasting life.
Money Problems and Debt Can the Bible Help?
The following four Bible principles can help you with money problems and debt:
Plan your spending.
"The plans of the diligent one surely make for advantage, but everyone that is hasty surely heads for want. "
(Proverbs 21:5) Don’t rush to buy something just because it’s on sale.
Make a financial plan​ a budget​ and stick to it.
Avoid unnecessary debt.
"The borrower is servant to the man doing the lending. "
(Proverbs 22:7) If you are already in debt and can’t meet your obligations, try to negotiate new payment plans with your creditors.
Be persistent.
Use the Bible’s advice to one who unwisely guaranteed a loan and thus took on responsibility for the debt: "Humble yourself, and pester your neighbor.
Don’t let your eyes rest or your eyelids close. "
(Proverbs 6:1-5, God’s Word Bible) Even if your first request isn’t successful, keep on asking for an adjustment.
Keep money in its proper place.
"Don’t be selfish and eager to get rich​ you will end up worse off than you can imagine. "
(Proverbs 28:22, Contemporary English Version) Envy and greed not only can lead to financial ruin but also can crowd out spiritual matters.
Be content.
"Having sustenance and covering, we shall be content with these things. " (1 Timothy 6:8) Money can’t buy happiness or contentment.
Some of the happiest people in the world do not have a lot of money.
What they do have is the love of family and friends and a friendship with God.​ Proverbs 15:17; 1 Peter 5:6, 7.
I Don’t Feel Good About My Life Can Religion, God, or the Bible Help?
Yes.
The Bible, an ancient book of wisdom, provides answers to life’s important questions and can help you to feel better and have a sense of well-being.
Consider some questions that it answers.
Is there a Creator?
The Bible says that God "created all things. "
(Revelation 4:11) As our Creator, God knows what we need to feel good and to find fulfillment in life.
Does God care about me?
Rather than portraying God as aloof from mankind, the Bible says: "He is not far off from each one of us. "
(Acts 17:27) He is interested in what happens to you and wants to help you succeed in life.
Isaiah 48:17, 18; 1 Peter 5:7.
How can knowing God help me to feel better?
God created us with a "spiritual need, " an innate hunger to understand the meaning and purpose of life.
(Matthew 5:3) Our spiritual need also includes a desire to know our Creator and to have a relationship with him.
God will welcome your efforts to get to know him, for the Bible says: "Draw close to God, and he will draw close to you. "
James 4:8.
Millions of people have found that building a friendship with God has improved their overall well-being and shown them how to feel good about their lives.
While knowing God will not make your life trouble-free, his wisdom found in the Bible can help you to
Have a happier family life.
Enjoy peace with others.
Deal with problems as varied as depression, stress about money, and chronic illness.
Many religions that use the Bible do not actually follow its teachings.
In contrast, true religion, which adheres to what the Bible really says, will help you to get to know God.
What Does the Bible Say About Anger?
The Bible teaches that uncontrolled anger is harmful, both to the person who harbors it and to those around him.
(Proverbs 29:22) Although anger may be justified at times, the Bible says that those who continue to have "fits of anger " will not gain salvation.
(Galatians 5:​19-​21) The Bible contains principles that can help a person deal with anger.
Is anger always wrong?
When is anger wrong?
How can you deal with anger?
Bible verses about anger
Anger may be justified in some cases.
For example, the faithful man Nehemiah "became very angry " when he learned that some of his fellow worshippers were being oppressed.​ Nehemiah 5:6.
At times, God feels anger.
For example, when his ancient people broke their agreement to worship only him and started to serve false gods, "Jehovah’s anger blazed against " them.
(Judges 2:​13, 14) Even so, anger is not a dominant aspect of Jehovah God’s personality.
His anger is always justified and controlled.​ Exodus 34:6; Isaiah 48:9.
Anger is wrong when it is uncontrolled or unjustified, which is often the case with the anger displayed by imperfect humans.
Cain "grew hot with anger " when God rejected his sacrifice.
Cain allowed his anger to fester to the point that he murdered his brother.​ Genesis 4:​3-8.
The prophet Jonah "became hot with anger " when God showed mercy to the Ninevites.
God corrected Jonah, pointing out that it was not "right for [him] to be so angry " and that he should have felt compassion for those repentant sinners.​ Jonah 3:⁠10–​4:​1, 4, 11.
These examples illustrate that for imperfect humans, "man’s anger does not bring about God’s righteousness. "​ James 1:​20.
Recognize the danger of uncontrolled anger.
Some may think that unleashing their anger is a sign of strength.
In reality, someone who cannot control his anger has a serious weakness.
"As a city broken through, without a wall, is the man who cannot control his temper. "
(Proverbs 25:28; 29:11) On the other hand, when we cultivate the ability to control our anger, we demonstrate true strength and discernment.
(Proverbs 14:29) The Bible says: "The one slow to anger is better than a mighty man. "​ Proverbs 16:32.
Deal with anger before it causes you to do something you will regret.
"Let go of anger and abandon rage, " says Psalm 37:8, adding: "Do not become upset and turn to doing evil. "
Notice that when we feel angry, we have a choice​ we can choose to let it go before we end up "doing evil. "
As Ephesians 4:​26 says, "be wrathful, but do not sin. "
If possible, take your leave when anger starts to build.
"Beginning a fight is like opening a floodgate, " says the Bible. "Before the quarrel breaks out, take your leave. "
(Proverbs 17:14) Although it is wise to settle differences with others quickly, both you and the other person may first need to cool down before you can discuss matters calmly.
Get the facts.
"The insight of a man certainly slows down his anger, " says Proverbs 19:11.
We are wise to gather all the facts before forming a conclusion.
When we carefully listen to all sides of a matter, we are less likely to feel unjustified anger.​ James 1:​19.
Pray for peace of mind.
Prayer can help you experience "the peace of God that surpasses all understanding. "
(Philippians 4:7) Prayer is one of the main ways we receive God’s holy spirit, which can produce in us such qualities as peace, patience, and self-control.​ Luke 11:13; Galatians 5:​22, 23.
Choose your associates carefully.
We tend to become like the people we associate with.
(Proverbs 13:20; 1 Corinthians 15:33) For good reason, the Bible warns: "Do not keep company with a hot-tempered man or get involved with one disposed to rage. "
"So that you never learn his ways and ensnare yourself. "​ Proverbs 22:24, 25.
Proverbs 16:32: "The one slow to anger is better than a mighty man. "
Meaning: It is a sign of strength to control your anger.
Proverbs 17:14: "Beginning a fight is like opening a floodgate; before the quarrel breaks out, take your leave. "
Meaning: If tempers are flaring, leave the scene.
Proverbs 19:11: "The insight of a man certainly slows down his anger. "
Meaning: We can prevent unnecessary anger by considering all aspects of a situation rather than forming conclusions before we have all the facts.
Proverbs 22:24, 25: "Do not keep company with a hot-tempered man or get involved with one disposed to rage, so that you never learn his ways. "
Meaning: If we associate with people who are prone to anger, we will probably become like them.
Proverbs 29:11: "A stupid person gives vent to all his feelings. "
Meaning: We are wise to control our emotions rather than to let them control us.
Galatians 5:​22, 23: "The fruitage of the spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faith, mildness, self-control. "
Meaning: God’s holy spirit, or his power in action, can produce in us qualities that help to counter anger.
Ephesians 4:​26: "Be wrathful, but do not sin. "
Meaning: We cannot always prevent ourselves from feeling anger, but we can control how we deal with it.
James 1:​19: "Everyone must be quick to listen, slow to speak, slow to anger. "
Meaning: We can slow down our anger by being a good listener.
Was Jesus Just a Good Man?
Jesus was more than just a good man.
At the very least, he has proved to be the most influential man in human history.
Note what these famous historians and writers have said about him:
"Jesus of Nazareth . . . is easily the dominant figure in history. "
H. G. Wells, English historian.
"[Jesus’] life is the most influential ever lived on this planet and its effect continues to mount. "
Kenneth Scott Latourette, American historian and author.
The Bible identifies why Jesus has had a greater impact than any other good man who ever lived.
When Jesus asked his closest followers who they thought he was, one of them correctly answered: "You are the Christ, the Son of the living God. "
Matthew 16:16.
Is Jesus Almighty God?
The Bible’s answer
Jesus’ opposers accused him of making himself equal to God.
(John 5:18; 10:30-33) However, Jesus never claimed to be on the same level as Almighty God.
He said: "The Father is greater than I am. "
John 14:28.
Jesus’ early followers did not view him as being equal to Almighty God.
For example, the apostle Paul wrote that after Jesus was resurrected, God "exalted him [Jesus] to a superior position. "
Obviously, Paul did not believe that Jesus was Almighty God.
Otherwise, how could God exalt Jesus to a superior position?
Philippians 2:9.
Why Is Jesus Called the Son of God?
The Bible often calls Jesus "the Son of God. "
(John 1:49) The expression "Son of God " acknowledges that God is the Creator, or Source, of all life, including that of Jesus.
(Psalm 36:9; Revelation 4:11) The Bible does not teach that God literally fathered a child in the same way that humans produce children.
The Bible also calls the angels "sons of the true God. "
(Job 1:6) And the Bible says that the first human, Adam, was a "son of God. "
(Luke 3:38) However, because Jesus was God’s first creation and the only one created directly by him, the Bible describes Jesus as the foremost Son of God.
Did Jesus live in heaven before he was born on earth?
What did Jesus do before he came to the earth?
Jesus was a spirit creature in heaven before he was born as a human on earth.
Jesus himself said: "I have come down from heaven. "
John 6:38; 8:23.
God created Jesus before he created anything else.
Regarding Jesus, the Bible says:
"He is . . . the firstborn of all creation. "
Colossians 1:15.
He is "the beginning of the creation by God. "
Revelation 3:14.
Jesus fulfilled the prophecy about the one "whose origin is from ancient times, from the days of long ago. "
Micah 5:2; Matthew 2:4-6.
He held an exalted heavenly position.
Jesus referred to this position when he prayed: "Father, glorify me . . . with the glory that I had alongside you before the world was. "
John 17:5.
He helped his Father create all other things.
Jesus worked alongside God "as a master worker. "
(Proverbs 8:30) Regarding Jesus, the Bible says: "By means of him all other things were created in the heavens and on the earth. "
Colossians 1:16.
God worked through Jesus to bring every other creation into existence.
This creation included all other spirit creatures, as well as the physical universe.
(Revelation 5:11) In some respects, this cooperation between God and Jesus was like that of an architect working with a builder.
The architect creates the design; the builder brings the design to reality.
He served as the Word.
When speaking of Jesus’ prehuman life, the Bible calls Jesus "the Word. "
(John 1:1) Evidently, this means that God used his Son to convey information and instructions to other spirit creatures.
Jesus also seems to have acted as God’s Spokesman to humans on earth.
God likely spoke through Jesus as the Word when giving instructions to Adam and Eve in the garden of Eden.
(Genesis 2:16, 17) Jesus may have been the angel who guided the ancient Israelites through the wilderness and whose voice the Israelites were strictly to obey.
Exodus 23:20-23.
Who Is the Antichrist?
The antichrist is not merely one individual person or entity, for the Bible says that there are "many antichrists. " (1 John 2:​18) Rather, the term "antichrist, " which comes from a Greek word meaning "against (or instead of) Christ, " refers to anyone who does the following:
Denies that Jesus is the Christ (Messiah) or denies that he is the Son of God.​ 1 John 2:​22.
Opposes the Christ, God’s Anointed One.​ Psalm 2:​1, 2; Luke 11:23.
Pretends to be the Christ.​ Matthew 24:24.
Persecutes the followers of Christ, since Jesus views what is done to them as being done to him.​ Acts 9:5.
Falsely claims to be a Christian while practicing lawlessness or deception.​ Matthew 7:​22, 23; 2 Corinthians 11:13.
Besides speaking of individuals who take such actions as being antichrists, the Bible also refers to them collectively as "the antichrist. " (2 John 7) The antichrist first appeared in the time of the apostles and has been active ever since.
Bible prophecy foretold just such a development.​ 1 John 4:3.
How to identify antichrists
They promote false ideas related to Jesus.
(Matthew 24:​9, 11) For example, those who teach the Trinity or that Jesus is Almighty God actually oppose the teachings of Jesus, who said: "The Father is greater than I am. "​ John 14:28.
Antichrists reject what Jesus said about how God’s Kingdom operates.
For instance, some religious leaders say that Christ works through human governments.
Yet, this teaching contradicts Jesus, who said: "My Kingdom is no part of this world. "​ John 18:36.
They say that Jesus is their Lord, but they do not obey his commands, including the one to preach the good news of the Kingdom.​ Matthew 28:19, 20; Luke 6:​46; Acts 10:42.
Who Is the Archangel Michael?
Michael, referred to by some religions as "Saint Michael, " is evidently a name given to Jesus before and after his life on earth.
Michael disputed with Satan after the death of Moses and helped an angel deliver God’s message to the prophet Daniel.
(Daniel 10:13, 21; Jude 9) Michael lives up to the meaning of his name​ "Who Is Like God? "​ by defending God’s rulership and fighting God’s enemies.​ Daniel 12:1; Revelation 12:7.
Consider why it is reasonable to conclude that Jesus is the archangel Michael.
Michael is "the archangel. "
(Jude 9) The title "archangel, " meaning "chief of the angels, " appears in only two Bible verses.
In both cases, the word is singular, suggesting that only one angel bears that title.
One of those verses states that the resurrected Lord Jesus "will descend from heaven with a commanding call, with an archangel’s voice. " (1 Thessalonians 4:​16) Jesus has "an archangel’s voice " because he is the archangel, Michael.
Michael commands an angelic army.
"Michael and his angels battled with the dragon, " Satan.
(Revelation 12:7) Michael has great authority in the spirit realm, for he is called "one of the foremost princes " and "the great prince. "
(Daniel 10:13, 21; 12:1) These titles designate Michael as "the commander-in-chief of the angelic forces, " as New Testament scholar David E. Aune puts it.
The Bible mentions only one other name of someone having authority over an army of angels.
It describes "the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven with his powerful angels in a flaming fire, as he brings vengeance. " (2 Thessalonians 1:​7, 8; Matthew 16:27) Jesus "went to heaven, and angels and authorities and powers were made subject to him. " (1 Peter 3:​21, 22) It would not make sense for God to set up Jesus and Michael as rival commanders of the holy angels.
Rather, it is more reasonable to conclude that both names, Jesus and Michael, refer to the same person.
Michael "will stand up " during an unprecedented "time of distress. "
(Daniel 12:1) In the book of Daniel, the expression "stand up " is often used to refer to a king who rises up to take special action.
(Daniel 11:​2-4, 21) Jesus Christ, identified as "The Word of God, " will take special action as the "King of kings " to strike down all of God’s enemies and protect God’s people.
(Revelation 19:11-​16) He will do so during a time of "great tribulation such as has not occurred since the world’s beginning. "​ Matthew 24:21, 42.
When Was Jesus Born?
The Bible does not give a specific date for the birth of Jesus Christ, as these reference works show:
"The true birth date of Christ is unknown. "
New Catholic Encyclopedia.
"The exact date of Christ’s birth is not known. "
Encyclopedia of Early Christianity.
While the Bible does not directly answer the question, ‘When was Jesus born?’ it does describe two events surrounding his birth that lead many to conclude that he was not born on December 25.
Not in winter
The registration.
Shortly before Jesus was born, Caesar Augustus issued a decree ordering "all the inhabited earth to be registered. "
Everyone had to register in "his own city, " which might have required a journey of a week or more.
(Luke 2:1-3) That order probably made to support taxation and military conscription would have been unpopular at any time of year, but it is unlikely that Augustus would have provoked his subjects further by forcing many of them to make long trips during the cold winter.
The sheep.
Shepherds were "living out of doors and keeping watches in the night over their flocks. "
(Luke 2:8) The book Daily Life in the Time of Jesus notes that flocks lived in the open air from "the week before the Passover [late March] " through mid-November.
It then adds: "They passed the winter under cover; and from this alone it may be seen that the traditional date for Christmas, in the winter, is unlikely to be right, since the Gospel says that the shepherds were in the fields. "
In early fall
We can estimate when Jesus was born by counting backward from his death on Passover, Nisan 14 in the spring of the year 33 C.E.
(John 19:14-16) Jesus was about 30 years old when he began his three-and-a-half-year ministry, so he was born in the early fall of 2 B.C.E. Luke 3:23.
Why is Christmas on December 25?
Since there is no evidence that the birth of Jesus Christ occurred on December 25, why is Christmas celebrated on this date?
The Encyclopædia Britannica says that church leaders probably chose it "to coincide with the pagan Roman festival marking the ‘birthday of the unconquered sun,’ " at the time of the winter solstice.
According to The Encyclopedia Americana, many scholars believe that this was done "in order to make Christianity more meaningful to pagan converts. "
Do Scholars Believe That Jesus Existed?
Scholars have a solid basis for believing that Jesus existed.
Regarding the references made by first- and second-century historians to Jesus and the early Christians, the Encyclopædia Britannica, 2002 Edition, says: "These independent accounts prove that in ancient times even the opponents of Christianity never doubted the historicity of Jesus, which was disputed for the first time and on inadequate grounds at the end of the 18th, during the 19th, and at the beginning of the 20th centuries. "
In 2006, the book Jesus and Archaeology said: "No reputable scholar today questions that a Jew named Jesus son of Joseph lived; most readily admit that we now know a considerable amount about his actions and his basic teachings. "
The Bible portrays Jesus as a real person.
It provides the names of his ancestors and immediate family.
(Matthew 1:1; 13:55) It also gives the names of prominent rulers who were contemporaries of Jesus.
(Luke 3:1, 2) Those details allow researchers to verify the accuracy of the Bible accounts.
Does the Bible Contain an Accurate Record of Jesus’ Life?
The Bible writer Luke said regarding his account of Jesus’ life: "I have traced all things from the start with accuracy. "
Luke 1:3.
Some claim that accounts of Jesus’ life as recorded in the Gospels the writings of his contemporaries Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John were altered sometime in the fourth century.
However, a valuable fragment of John’s Gospel was found in Egypt at the turn of the 20th century.
It is now known as the Papyrus Rylands 457 (P52) and is preserved at the John Rylands Library, Manchester, England.
It contains what is John 18:31-33, 37, 38 in modern Bibles.
This is the oldest known manuscript fragment of the Christian Greek Scriptures.
Many scholars believe that it was written about 125 C.E., a mere quarter of a century or so after the original was written.
The text of the fragment agrees nearly exactly with that in later manuscripts.
What Did Jesus Look Like?
No one knows exactly what Jesus looked like, since his physical appearance is not described in the Bible.
This indicates that Jesus’ physical features are not important.
However, the Bible does give us some idea of Jesus’ general appearance.
Features: Jesus was a Jew and likely inherited common Semitic traits from his mother.
(Hebrews 7:​14) It is unlikely that his features were especially distinctive.
On one occasion he was able to travel in secret from Galilee to Jerusalem without being recognized.
(John 7:​10, 11) And he apparently did not stand out even among his closest disciples.
Recall that Judas Iscariot had to identify Jesus to the armed crowd that arrested him.​ Matthew 26:47-​49.
Hair length: It is unlikely that Jesus’ hair was long, because the Bible says that "long hair is a dishonor to a man. "​ 1 Corinthians 11:14.
Beard: Jesus wore a beard.
He followed Jewish law, which prohibited adult males from ‘disfiguring the edges of their beard.’
(Leviticus 19:27; Galatians 4:4) Also, the Bible mentions Jesus’ beard in a prophecy about his suffering.​ Isaiah 50:6.
Body: All indications are that Jesus was physically robust.
During his ministry, he traveled many miles.
(Matthew 9:​35) He cleansed the Jewish temple twice, overturning the tables of money changers, and once drove out livestock with a whip.
(Luke 19:45, 46; John 2:​14, 15) McClintock and Strong’s Cyclopedia states: "The whole evangelical narrative indicates [Jesus’] sound and vigorous bodily health. "​ Volume IV, page 884.
Facial expressions: Jesus was warm and compassionate, and his facial expressions no doubt reflected this.
(Matthew 11:28, 29) People of all sorts sought him out for comfort and help.
(Luke 5:​12, 13; 7:​37, 38) Even children felt at ease in his presence.​ Matthew 19:13-​15; Mark 9:​35-​37.
Misconceptions about Jesus’ appearance
Misconception: Some argue that Jesus must have been of African descent because the book of Revelation compares his hair to wool and his feet to "burnished bronze. "​ Revelation 1:​14, 15, The New Jerusalem Bible.
Fact: The book of Revelation is presented "in signs. "
(Revelation 1:1) The description of Jesus’ hair and feet uses symbolic language to illustrate Jesus’ qualities after his resurrection, not to describe his physical appearance when he was on earth.
In saying that Jesus’ "head and his hair were white as white wool, as snow, " Revelation 1:​14 uses color, not texture, as a point of comparison.
This represents his wisdom due to age.
(Revelation 3:​14) This verse is not comparing the texture of Jesus’ hair to that of wool any more than it is comparing the texture of his hair to that of snow.
Jesus’ feet looked "like fine copper when glowing in a furnace. "
(Revelation 1:​15) Also, his face was "like the sun when it shines at its brightest. "
(Revelation 1:​16) Since no race has skin color matching these descriptions, this vision must be symbolic, showing the resurrected Jesus as the one "who dwells in unapproachable light. "​ 1 Timothy 6:​16.
Misconception: Jesus was weak and frail.
Fact: Jesus was manly in his behavior.
For example, he boldly identified himself to the armed crowd that came to arrest him.
(John 18:​4-8) Jesus must also have been physically strong to have worked as a carpenter using manual tools.​ Mark 6:3.
Why, then, did Jesus need help to carry his torture stake?
And why did he die before the others executed with him died?
(Luke 23:26; John 19:31-​33) Just prior to Jesus’ execution, his body was seriously weakened.
He had been up all night, in part because of emotional agony.
(Luke 22:42-​44) During the night the Jews had mistreated him, and the next morning the Romans had tortured him.
(Matthew 26:67, 68; John 19:​1-3) Such factors likely hastened his death.
Misconception: Jesus was always somber, melancholy.
Fact: Jesus perfectly reflected the qualities of his heavenly Father, Jehovah, whom the Bible describes as "the happy God. " (1 Timothy 1:​11; John 14:9) In fact, Jesus taught others how to be happy.
(Matthew 5:​3-9; Luke 11:28) These facts indicate that Jesus often reflected happiness in his facial expressions.
Was Jesus Married?
Did Jesus Have Siblings?
The Bible makes clear that Jesus was not married, even though it does not specifically comment on his marital status.
Consider the following.
The Bible frequently refers to Jesus’ family as well as to women who accompanied him during his ministry and who stood by when he was executed, yet it never mentions his having a wife.
(Matthew 12:46, 47; Mark 3:​31, 32; 15:40; Luke 8:​2, 3, 19, 20; John 19:25) The most plausible reason why the Bible is silent on this matter is that he was never married.
Concerning those who remain unmarried so that they can do more in God’s service, Jesus told his disciples: "Let the one who can make room for it [singleness] make room for it. "
(Matthew 19:10-​12) He set the pattern for those who choose not to marry in order to devote themselves more fully to God.​ John 13:15; 1 Corinthians 7:​32-​38.
Just before he died, Jesus arranged for the care of his mother.
(John 19:25-​27) If Jesus had been married or had fathered children, he would have made sure that such close family members were provided for as well.
The Bible uses Jesus as an example for husbands, but it does not refer to the way he treated a human wife.
Instead, it says: "Husbands, continue loving your wives, just as the Christ also loved the congregation and gave himself up for it. "
(Ephesians 5:​25) If Jesus had actually been married while on earth, would not his perfect example as a literal husband have been used in that verse?
Did Jesus have siblings?
Yes, Jesus had at least six siblings.
These included his brothers James, Joseph, Simon, and Judas as well as at least two sisters.
(Matthew 13:54-​56; Mark 6:3) Those siblings were natural children of Jesus’ mother, Mary, and her husband, Joseph.
(Matthew 1:​25) The Bible calls Jesus "the firstborn " of Mary, which implies that she had other children.​ Luke 2:7.
Misconceptions about Jesus’ brothers
In order to support the idea that Mary remained a virgin all her life, some have applied different meanings to the term "brothers. "
For example, some feel that Jesus’ brothers were actually sons of Joseph by an earlier marriage.
However, the Bible shows that Jesus inherited the legal right to the kingship promised to David.
(2 Samuel 7:​12, 13; Luke 1:​32) If Joseph had been father to sons older than Jesus, the eldest of these would have been Joseph’s legal heir.
Could the expression refer to Jesus’ disciples, or spiritual brothers?
This idea conflicts with the Scriptures, since the Bible says that at one point "his brothers were, in fact, not exercising faith in him. "
(John 7:5) The Bible distinguishes Jesus’ brothers from his disciples.​ John 2:​12.
According to another theory, Jesus’ brothers were actually his cousins.
Yet, the Greek Scriptures use distinct words for "brother, " "relative, " and "cousin. "
(Luke 21:16; Colossians 4:​10) Many Bible scholars acknowledge that Jesus’ brothers and sisters were his actual siblings.
For example, The Expositor’s Bible Commentary states: "The most natural way to understand ‘brothers’ . . . is that the term refers to sons of Mary and Joseph and thus to brothers of Jesus on his mother’s side. "
Why Did Jesus Die?
Jesus died so that humans could have their sins forgiven and receive endless life.
(Romans 6:​23; Ephesians 1:7) Jesus’ death also proved that a human can remain loyal to God even when faced with the severest of tests.​ Hebrews 4:​15.
Consider how the death of one man could accomplish so much.
Jesus died for "the forgiveness of our sins. "​ Colossians 1:​14.
The first human, Adam, was created perfect, without sin.
However, he chose to disobey God.
Adam’s disobedience, or sin, profoundly affected all his descendants.
"Through the disobedience of the one man, " the Bible explains, "many were made sinners. "​ Romans 5:​19.
Jesus was also perfect, but he never sinned.
Therefore, he could be "an atoning sacrifice for our sins. " (1 John 2:2; footnote) Just as Adam’s disobedience contaminated the human family with sin, so Jesus’ death removed the stain of sin from all who exercise faith in him.
In a sense, Adam sold the human race into sin.
Jesus, by willingly dying in our behalf, repurchased humankind as his own.
As a result, "if anyone does commit a sin, we have a helper with the Father, Jesus Christ, a righteous one. "​ 1 John 2:1.
Jesus died "so that everyone exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life. "​ John 3:​16.
Although Adam was created to live forever, his sin brought upon him the penalty of death.
Through Adam, "sin entered into the world and death through sin, and so death spread to all men because they had all sinned. "​ Romans 5:​12.
In contrast, Jesus’ death not only removed the blemish of sin but also canceled the death sentence for all who exercise faith in him.
The Bible sums up matters this way: "Just as sin ruled as king with death, so also undeserved kindness might rule as king through righteousness leading to everlasting life through Jesus Christ our Lord. "​ Romans 5:​21.
Of course, humans today still have a limited life span.
However, God promises that he will grant righteous humans everlasting life and resurrect the dead so that they too can benefit from Jesus’ sacrificial death.​ Psalm 37:29; 1 Corinthians 15:22.
Jesus "became obedient to the point of death, " thus proving that a human could be faithful to God under any test or trial.​ Philippians 2:8.
Despite having a perfect mind and body, Adam disobeyed God because he selfishly desired something that did not belong to him.
(Genesis 2:​16, 17; 3:6) Later, God’s chief enemy, Satan, suggested that no human would unselfishly obey God, especially if his life were on the line.
(Job 2:4) Yet, the perfect man Jesus obeyed God and remained loyal to him, even undergoing a disgraceful and painful death.
(Hebrews 7:​26) This completely settled the matter: A human can remain faithful to God under whatever test or trial may be brought upon him.
Jesus on the torture stake with a robber on each side of him
Questions about Jesus’ death
Why did Jesus have to suffer and die to redeem humans?
Why didn’t God just cancel the death sentence?
God’s law states that "the wages sin pays is death. "
(Romans 6:​23) Rather than hide this law from Adam, God told him that the penalty for disobedience would be death.
(Genesis 3:3) When Adam sinned, God, "who cannot lie, " kept his word.
(Titus 1:2) Adam passed on to his descendants not only sin but also the wages of sin​ death.
Although sinful humans deserve the penalty of death, God extended to them "the riches of his undeserved kindness. "
(Ephesians 1:7) His provision to redeem mankind​ sending Jesus as a perfect sacrifice​ was both profoundly just and supremely merciful.
When did Jesus die?
Jesus died at "the ninth hour " from sunrise, or at about three o’clock in the afternoon of the Jewish Passover.
(Mark 15:33-​37, footnote) That date corresponds to Friday, April 1, 33 C.E., according to modern calendars.
Where did Jesus die?
Jesus was executed at "the so-called Skull Place, which is called Golgotha in Hebrew. "
(John 19:17, 18) This site was "outside the city gate " of Jerusalem in Jesus’ day.
(Hebrews 13:12) It may have been on a hill, since the Bible says that some observed Jesus’ execution "from a distance. "
(Mark 15:40) However, the present location of Golgotha cannot be determined with certainty.
How did Jesus die?
Although many believe that Jesus was crucified​ executed on a cross​ the Bible reports: "His own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree. " (1 Peter 2:​24, King James Version) Bible writers used two Greek words to refer to the instrument of Jesus’ execution​ stauros and xylon.
Many scholars have concluded that these words refer to a beam or an upright stake made of one piece of wood.
How should Jesus’ death be remembered?
On the night of the annual Jewish Passover, Jesus instituted a simple procedure with his followers and commanded them: "Keep doing this in remembrance of me. " (1 Corinthians 11:24) Hours later, Jesus was put to death.
Bible writers compared Jesus to the lamb sacrificed at the Passover.
(1 Corinthians 5:7) Just as the Passover celebration reminded the Israelites that they had been freed from slavery, so the Memorial of Jesus Christ’s death reminds Christians that they have been freed from sin and death.
The Passover, held on Nisan 14 according to the lunar calendar, was a yearly celebration; the early Christians likewise observed the Memorial once each year.
Annually, on the date corresponding to Nisan 14, millions of people worldwide commemorate Jesus’ death.
Did Jesus Die on a Cross?
Many view the cross as the most common symbol of Christianity.
However, the Bible does not describe the instrument of Jesus’ death, so no one can know its shape with absolute certainty.
Still, the Bible provides evidence that Jesus died, not on a cross, but on an upright stake.
The Bible generally uses the Greek word stauros when referring to the instrument of Jesus’ execution.
(Matthew 27:40; John 19:17) Although translations often render this word "cross, " many scholars agree that its basic meaning is actually "upright stake. "
According to A Critical Lexicon and Concordance to the English and Greek New Testament, stauros "never means two pieces of wood joining each other at any angle. "
The Bible also uses the Greek word xylon as a synonym for stauros.
(Acts 5:​30; 1 Peter 2:​24) This word means "wood, " "timber, " "stake, " or "tree. "
The Companion Bible thus concludes: "There is nothing in the Greek of the N[ew] T[estament] even to imply two pieces of timber. "
Is using the cross in worship acceptable to God?
A crux simplex​ the Latin term for a single stake used for impalement of a criminal
Regardless of the shape of the instrument on which Jesus died, the following facts and Bible verses indicate that we should not use the cross in worship.
God rejects worship that uses images or symbols, including the cross.
God commanded the Israelites not to use "the form of any symbol " in their worship, and Christians are likewise told to "flee from idolatry. "​ Deuteronomy 4:​15-​19; 1 Corinthians 10:14.
First-century Christians did not use the cross in worship.
The teachings and example of the apostles set a pattern that all Christians should adhere to.​ 2 Thessalonians 2:​15.
Use of the cross in worship has a pagan origin.
Hundreds of years after the death of Jesus, when the churches had deviated from his teachings, new church members "were permitted largely to retain their pagan signs and symbols, " including the cross.
(The Expanded Vine’s Expository Dictionary of New Testament Words) However, the Bible does not condone adopting pagan symbols to help make new converts.​ 2 Corinthians 6:​17.
After Jesus’ Resurrection, Was His Body Flesh or Spirit?
The Bible says that Jesus "was put to death in the flesh but made alive [resurrected] in the spirit. "​ 1 Peter 3:​18; Acts 13:34; 1 Corinthians 15:45; 2 Corinthians 5:​16.
Jesus’ own words showed that he would not be resurrected with his flesh-and-blood body.
He said that he would give his "flesh in behalf of the life of the world, " as a ransom for mankind.
(John 6:​51; Matthew 20:28) If he had taken back his flesh when he was resurrected, he would have canceled that ransom sacrifice.
This could not have happened, though, for the Bible says that he sacrificed his flesh and blood "once for all time. "
Hebrews 9:​11, 12.
If Jesus was raised up with a spirit body, how could his disciples see him?
Spirit creatures can take on human form.
For example, angels who did this in the past even ate and drank with humans.
(Genesis 18:​1-8; 19:​1-3) However, they still were spirit creatures and could leave the physical realm.​ Judges 13:15-​21.
After his resurrection, Jesus also assumed human form temporarily, just as angels had previously done.
As a spirit creature, though, he was able to appear and disappear suddenly.
(Luke 24:31; John 20:19, 26) The fleshly bodies that he materialized were not identical from one appearance to the next.
Thus, even Jesus’ close friends recognized him only by what he said or did.​ Luke 24:30, 31, 35; John 20:14-​16; 21:​6, 7.
When Jesus appeared to the apostle Thomas, he took on a body with wound marks.
He did this to bolster Thomas’ faith, since Thomas doubted that Jesus had been raised up.​ John 20:24-​29.
Jesus Saves​ How?
Jesus saved faithful humans when he gave his life as a ransom sacrifice.
(Matthew 20:28) Thus, the Bible calls Jesus the "Savior of the world. " (1 John 4:​14) It also states: "There is no salvation in anyone else, for there is no other name under heaven that has been given among men by which we must get saved. "​ Acts 4:​12.
Jesus ‘tasted death for everyone’ who exercises faith in him.
(Hebrews 2:9; John 3:​16) Thereafter, "God raised him up from the dead, " and Jesus returned to heaven as a spirit creature.
(Acts 3:​15) There, Jesus is able "to save completely those who are approaching God through him, because he is always alive to plead for them. "​ Hebrews 7:​25.
Why do we need Jesus to plead for us?
We are all sinners.
(Romans 3:​23) Sin puts a barrier between us and God, and it leads to death.
(Romans 6:​23) But Jesus serves as "an advocate " for those who exercise faith in his ransom sacrifice.
(1 John 2:1, footnote) He pleads in their behalf, asking God to hear their prayers and grant forgiveness of their sins on the basis of Jesus’ sacrificial death.
(Matthew 1:​21; Romans 8:​34) God acts on such pleas made by Jesus because they are in harmony with His will.
God sent Jesus to the earth "for the world to be saved through him. "​ John 3:​17.
Is belief in Jesus all that we need to be saved?
Although we must believe in Jesus to gain salvation, more is required.
(Acts 16:30, 31) The Bible says: "Just as the body without spirit is dead, so also faith without works is dead. "
(James 2:​26) To be saved, we must:
Learn about Jesus and his Father, Jehovah.​ John 17:3.
Build faith in them.​ John 12:44; 14:1.
Demonstrate our faith by obeying their commands.
(Luke 6:​46; 1 John 2:​17) Jesus taught that not everyone who called him "Lord " would be saved but only those "doing the will of [his] Father who is in the heavens. "​ Matthew 7:​21.
Continue to demonstrate our faith despite hardships.
Jesus made that clear when he said: "The one who has endured to the end will be saved. "​ Matthew 24:13.
How Is Jesus’ Sacrifice "a Ransom for Many "?
Jesus’ sacrifice is the means by which God delivers, or saves, humankind from sin and death.
The Bible refers to the shed blood of Jesus as a ransom price.
(Ephesians 1:7; 1 Peter 1:​18, 19) Thus, Jesus said that he came "to give his life a ransom for many. "​ Matthew 20:28, King James Version.
Why was "a ransom for many " needed?
The first man, Adam, was created perfect, or without sin.
He had the prospect of living forever but lost it by choosing to disobey God.
(Genesis 3:​17-​19) When he had children, he passed on to them the defect of sin.
(Romans 5:​12) For this reason, the Bible indicates that Adam "sold " himself and his children into slavery to sin and death.
(Romans 7:​14) Being imperfect, none of them could buy back what Adam lost.​ Psalm 49:​7, 8.
God felt compassion for Adam’s descendants in their hopeless situation.
(John 3:​16) However, God’s standard of justice required that he not simply overlook or excuse their sins without a valid basis.
(Psalm 89:14; Romans 3:​23-​26) God loves mankind, so he provided the necessary legal means for their sins to be not only forgiven but also eliminated.
(Romans 5:​6-8) The ransom is that legal basis.
How does the ransom work?
In the Bible, the term "ransom " involves the following three elements:
It is a payment.​ Numbers 3:​46, 47.
It brings about a release, or redemption.​ Exodus 21:30.
It corresponds to the value of what is paid for, or covers it.
Consider how these elements apply to the ransom sacrifice of Jesus Christ.
Payment.
The Bible says that Christians were "bought with a price. " (1 Corinthians 6:​20; 7:​23) That price is the blood of Jesus, with which he "bought people for God out of every tribe and tongue and people and nation. "​ Revelation 5:​8, 9.
Release.
Jesus’ sacrifice provides a "release by ransom " from sin.​ 1 Corinthians 1:​30; Colossians 1:​14; Hebrews 9:​15.
Correspondence.
Jesus’ sacrifice corresponds exactly to what Adam lost​ one perfect human life.
(1 Corinthians 15:21, 22, 45, 46) The Bible says: "Just as through the disobedience of the one man [Adam] many were made sinners, so also through the obedience of the one person [Jesus Christ] many will be made righteous. "
(Romans 5:​19) This explains how the death of one man can pay the ransom for many sinners.
In fact, Jesus’ sacrifice is "a corresponding ransom for all " those who take the steps necessary to benefit from it.​ 1 Timothy 2:​5, 6.
Why Pray in Jesus’ Name?
We must pray to God in Jesus’ name because this is the only way God has approved for us to approach Him.
Jesus said: "I am the way and the truth and the life.
No one comes to the Father except through me. "
(John 14:6) Jesus also told his faithful apostles: "Most truly I say to you, If you ask the Father for anything he will give it to you in my name. "
John 16:23.
More reasons to pray in Jesus’ name
We honor Jesus and his Father, Jehovah God.
Philippians 2:9-11.
We show that we appreciate Jesus’ death as God’s provision for our salvation.
Matthew 20:28; Acts 4:12.
We recognize Jesus’ unique role as Intercessor between God and men.
Hebrews 7:25.
We respect Jesus’ service as the High Priest who can help us gain a good standing with God.
Hebrews 4:14-16.
What Is the Coming of Christ?
The Scriptures make dozens of references to the future time when Christ comes to judge the people of the earth.
For example, Matthew 25:31-​33 says:
"When the Son of man [Jesus Christ] comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, then he will sit down on his glorious throne.
All the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate people one from another, just as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.
And he will put the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on his left. "
This time of judgment will be part of a "great tribulation " unlike anything in human history.
That tribulation will culminate in the war of Armageddon.
(Matthew 24:21; Revelation 16:16) Christ’s enemies, described in his illustration as goats, "will undergo the judicial punishment of everlasting destruction. " (2 Thessalonians 1:9; Revelation 19:11, 15) In contrast, his faithful servants, the sheep, will have the prospect of "everlasting life. "​ Matthew 25:46.
When will Christ come?
Jesus said: "Concerning that day and hour nobody knows. "
(Matthew 24:36, 42; 25:13) However, he did describe a visible, composite "sign " that would identify the period leading up to his coming.​ Matthew 24:​3, 7-​14; Luke 21:10, 11.
Does Christ come in a body of spirit or of flesh?
Jesus was resurrected with a spirit body, so he comes as a spirit creature, not in the flesh.
(1 Corinthians 15:45; 1 Peter 3:​18) For this reason, Jesus could tell his apostles on the day before his death: "In a little while the world will see me no more. "​ John 14:19.
Common misconceptions about Christ’s coming
Misconception: When the Bible says that people will see Jesus "coming on the clouds, " it means that Jesus will come visibly.​ Matthew 24:30.
Fact: The Bible often associates clouds with something hidden from view.
(Leviticus 16:2; Numbers 11:25; Deuteronomy 33:26) For example, God told Moses: "I am coming to you in a dark cloud. "
(Exodus 19:9) Moses did not literally see God. Likewise, Christ ‘comes on the clouds’ in that people perceive his coming even though they cannot literally see him.
Misconception: The expression "every eye will see him, " used at Revelation 1:7 when speaking of Christ’s coming, is to be understood literally.
Fact: The Greek words in the Bible for "eye " and "seeing " are sometimes used in the sense of discerning or perceiving rather than referring to literal sight.
(Matthew 13:15; Luke 19:42; Romans 15:21; Ephesians 1:​18) The Bible says that the resurrected Jesus is "the one . . . who dwells in unapproachable light, whom no man . . . can see. " (1 Timothy 6:​16) Thus, "every eye will see him " in that all people will perceive that Jesus is the one who brings God’s judgment.​ Matthew 24:30.
Misconception: The words of 2 John 7 show that Jesus will come in the flesh.
Fact: That Bible verse states: "Many deceivers have gone out into the world, those not acknowledging Jesus Christ as coming in the flesh. "
In the apostle John’s day, some denied that Jesus had come to earth in the flesh as a man.
They were called Gnostics.
Second John 7 was written to refute their false claim.
What Is the Kingdom of God?
God’s Kingdom is a real government established by Jehovah God.
"The kingdom of God " is also called "the kingdom of heaven " in the Bible, since it rules from heaven.
(Mark 1:14, 15; Matthew 4:17, King James Version) It shares many attributes of human governments, yet it is superior to them in every way.
Rulers.
God has appointed Jesus Christ as King of the Kingdom and has given him more authority than any human ruler could ever have.
(Matthew 28:18) Jesus uses this power only for good, since he has already proved to be a reliable and compassionate Leader.
(Matthew 4:23; Mark 1:40, 41; 6:31-34; Luke 7:11-17) Under God’s direction, Jesus has selected persons from all nations who will "rule as kings over the earth " with him in heaven.
Revelation 5:9, 10.
Duration.
Unlike human governments, which come and go, God’s Kingdom "will never be brought to ruin. "
Subjects.
Anyone who does what God requires can be a subject of God’s Kingdom, without regard for ancestry or birthplace.
Laws.
The laws (or commandments) of God’s Kingdom do more than just prohibit wrong behavior.
They raise the moral character of its subjects.
For example, the Bible says: "‘You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind.’
This is the greatest and first commandment.
The second, like it, is this, ‘You must love your neighbor as yourself.’ " (Matthew 22:37-39) Love of God and neighbor moves subjects of the Kingdom to act in the best interests of others.
Education.
While God’s Kingdom sets high standards for its subjects, it also teaches people how to meet those standards.
Isaiah 48:17, 18.
Mission.
The Kingdom of God doesn’t enrich its rulers at the expense of its subjects.
Instead, it will accomplish God’s will, including the promise that those who love him will live forever on a paradise earth.
Isaiah 35:1, 5, 6; Matthew 6:10; Revelation 21:1-4.
Is the Kingdom of God in Your Heart?
No, God’s Kingdom is not merely a condition in the hearts of Christians.
The Bible identifies its true location by calling it "the kingdom of heaven. "
(Matthew 4:​17, King James Version) Consider how the Bible shows it to be a real government that is ruling from heaven.
God’s Kingdom has rulers, subjects, laws, and a mandate to establish the will of God in heaven and on the earth.​ Matthew 6:​10; Revelation 5:​10.
God’s government, or Kingdom, will rule over all "the peoples, nations, and language groups " of the earth.
(Daniel 7:​13, 14) The authority for its rulership comes, not from its subjects, but directly from God.​ Psalm 2:​4-6; Isaiah 9:7.
Jesus told his faithful apostles that they would join him in the Kingdom of heaven to "sit on thrones. "​ Luke 22:28, 30.
The Kingdom has enemies, which it will destroy.​ Psalm 2:​1, 2, 8, 9; 110:​1, 2; 1 Corinthians 15:25, 26.
The Bible does not teach that the Kingdom of heaven is in your heart in the sense that it rules through a person’s heart.
However, it does show that the "word of the Kingdom " or the "good news of the Kingdom " can and should affect our hearts.​ Matthew 13:19; 24:14.
What does "the kingdom of God is within you " mean?
Some people have become confused about the location of the Kingdom by the rendering of Luke 17:21 in some Bible translations.
For example, the King James Version says that "the kingdom of God is within you. "
To understand this verse correctly, we must consider the context.
Some of the religious leaders who opposed Jesus
God’s Kingdom was not in the heart of Jesus’ obstinate and murderous opposers
Jesus was speaking to the Pharisees, a group of religious leaders who opposed him and shared in arranging for his execution.
(Matthew 12:14; Luke 17:20) Does it make sense to think that the Kingdom was a condition in their obstinate hearts?
Jesus told them: "Inside you are full of hypocrisy and lawlessness. "​ Matthew 23:27, 28.
Other translations accurately clarify Jesus’ statement at Luke 17:21: "God’s kingdom is here with you. "
(Italics ours; Contemporary English Version) "The Kingdom of God is among you. "
(New World Translation, footnote) The Kingdom of heaven was "with " or "among " the Pharisees, in that Jesus, the one designated by God to rule as King, was standing before them.​ Luke 1:​32, 33.
What Are "the Keys of the Kingdom "?
"The keys of the Kingdom, " sometimes called "the keys to the kingdom, " represent the authority to open the way for people to "enter into the Kingdom of God. "
(Matthew 16:19; The New American Bible; Acts 14:22) Jesus gave Peter "the keys of the Kingdom of the heavens. "
This means that Peter received the authority to unlock information about how faithful people, by receiving God’s holy spirit, could enjoy the privilege of entering the Kingdom in heaven.
For whom were the keys used?
Peter used authority from God to open the way for three groups to enter the Kingdom:
Jews and Jewish converts.
Shortly after Jesus’ death, Peter encouraged a crowd of Jewish believers to accept Jesus as the one selected by God to rule in the Kingdom.
Peter showed them what they must do to get saved.
He thus opened the way for them to enter the Kingdom, and thousands "accepted his word. "​ Acts 2:​38-​41.
Samaritans.
Peter was later sent to the Samaritans.
He again used a key of the Kingdom when he, along with the apostle John, "prayed for them to get holy spirit. "
(Acts 8:​14-​17) This opened the way for the Samaritans to enter the Kingdom.
Gentiles.
Three and a half years after Jesus’ death, God revealed to Peter that Gentiles (non-Jews) would also have the opportunity to enter the Kingdom.
In response, Peter used one of the keys by preaching to Gentiles, thus opening the door for them to receive the holy spirit, become Christians, and be prospective members of the Kingdom.​ Acts 10:30-​35, 44, 45.
What does it mean to "enter into the Kingdom "?
Those who actually "enter into the Kingdom " become corulers with Jesus in heaven.
The Bible foretold that they would "sit on thrones " and "rule as kings over the earth. "​ Luke 22:29, 30; Revelation 5:​9, 10.
Misconceptions about the keys of the Kingdom
Misconception: Peter decides who may enter heaven.
Fact: The Bible says that Christ Jesus, not Peter, "is to judge the living and the dead. " (2 Timothy 4:​1, 8; John 5:​22) In fact, Peter himself said that Jesus "is the one decreed by God to be judge of the living and the dead. "​ Acts 10:34, 42.
Misconception: Heaven waited on Peter to decide when to use the keys of the Kingdom.
Fact: When Jesus spoke about the keys of the Kingdom, he told Peter: "Whatever you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatever you loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. "
(Matthew 16:19, The New American Bible) Although some understand this statement to mean that Peter dictated decisions to heaven, the original Greek verbs show that Peter’s decisions would follow those made in heaven rather than precede them.
The Bible elsewhere shows that Peter was subject to heaven when using the keys of the Kingdom.
For example, he responded to instructions from God when using the third key.​ Acts 10:19, 20.
What Is Heaven?
The word "heaven " is used in three basic senses in the Bible: (1) the physical heavens; (2) the spirit realm; and (3) a symbol of a high or exalted position.
In each case, the context helps determine the correct understanding.
The physical heavens.
In this sense, "the heavens " refers to earth’s atmosphere, where the winds blow, the birds fly, the clouds produce rain and snow, and the lightning flashes.
(Psalm 78:26; Proverbs 30:19; Isaiah 55:10; Luke 17:24) It can also mean outer space, the location of "the sun and the moon and the stars. "​ Deuteronomy 4:​19; Genesis 1:1.
The spirit realm.
The term "heaven " also refers to the spiritual heavens, or spirit realm, a level of existence higher than and outside of the physical universe.
(1 Kings 8:​27; John 6:​38) These spiritual heavens are occupied by Jehovah God, who is "a Spirit, " as well as by the angelic spirit beings whom he created.
(John 4:​24; Matthew 24:36) At times, "the heavens " are personified to represent the faithful angels, "the congregation of the holy ones. "​ Psalm 89:​5-7.
The Bible also uses "heavens " to refer specifically to the portion of the spirit realm where Jehovah actually resides, his "dwelling place. " (1 Kings 8:​43, 49; Hebrews 9:​24; Revelation 13:6) For example, the Bible foretold that Satan and the demons would be thrown out of heaven, no longer being allowed to enter Jehovah’s presence.
However, they would remain in the spirit realm.​ Revelation 12:​7-9, 12.
A symbol of a high or exalted position.
The Scriptures use "heaven " to represent an elevated position, usually in connection with ruling authority.
Such a position could be occupied by:
Jehovah God himself as the almighty Sovereign.​ 2 Chronicles 32:20; Luke 15:21.
God’s Kingdom, the government that will replace human rule.
The Bible refers to that Kingdom as the "new heavens. "​ Isaiah 65:17; 66:22; 2 Peter 3:​13.
Christians who, while on earth, have the hope of going to heaven.​ Ephesians 2:6.
Human governments that have exalted themselves over their subjects.​ Isaiah 14:12-​14; Daniel 4:​20-​22; 2 Peter 3:7.
Wicked spirits who now rule over the world.​ Ephesians 6:​12; 1 John 5:​19.
What is heaven like?
The spirit realm is a hive of activity.
It is occupied by hundreds of millions of spirit creatures "who carry out [Jehovah’s] word. "​ Psalm 103:20, 21; Daniel 7:​10.
The Bible describes heaven as being brilliantly lighted.
(1 Timothy 6:​15, 16) The prophet Ezekiel received a heavenly vision marked by "brilliant light, " while the vision of heaven that Daniel saw included "a stream of fire. "
(Ezekiel 1:​26-​28; Daniel 7:​9, 10) Heaven is holy, or clean, and beautiful.​ Psalm 96:6; Isaiah 63:15; Revelation 4:​2, 3.
The overall impression that the Bible gives of heaven is awe-inspiring.
(Ezekiel 43:​2, 3) Nevertheless, it is not possible for humans to comprehend heaven fully, since the spirit realm is beyond our senses.
Who Go to Heaven?
he Bible’s answer
God selects a limited number of faithful Christians who, after their death, will be resurrected to life in heaven.
(1 Peter 1:​3, 4) Once they have been chosen, they must continue to maintain a Christian standard of faith and conduct in order not to be disqualified from receiving their heavenly inheritance.​ Ephesians 5:5; Philippians 3:​12-​14.
What will those who go to heaven do there?
They will serve alongside Jesus as kings and priests for 1,000 years.
(Revelation 5:​9, 10; 20:6) They will form the "new heavens, " or heavenly government, that will rule over the "new earth, " or earthly society.
Those heavenly rulers will help restore mankind to the righteous conditions that God originally intended.​ Isaiah 65:17; 2 Peter 3:​13.
How many will be resurrected to heaven?
The Bible indicates that 144,000 people will be resurrected to heavenly life.
(Revelation 7:4) In the vision recorded at Revelation 14:​1-3, the apostle John saw "the Lamb standing on Mount Zion, and with him 144,000. "
In this vision, "the Lamb " represents the resurrected Jesus.
(John 1:​29; 1 Peter 1:​19) "Mount Zion " represents the exalted position of Jesus and the 144,000 who rule with him in the heavens.​ Psalm 2:6; Hebrews 12:22.
Those "who are called and chosen " to rule with Christ in the Kingdom are referred to as a "little flock. "
(Revelation 17:14; Luke 12:32) This shows that they would be relatively few in comparison with the complete number of Jesus’ sheep.​ John 10:16.
Misconceptions about those who go to heaven
Misconception: All good people go to heaven.
Fact: God promises everlasting life on earth for most good people.​ Psalm 37:11, 29, 34.
Jesus said: "No man has ascended into heaven. "
(John 3:​13) He thus showed that good people who died before him, such as Abraham, Moses, Job, and David, did not go to heaven.
(Acts 2:​29, 34) Instead, they had the hope of being resurrected to life on earth.​ Job 14:13-​15.
The resurrection to heavenly life is called "the first resurrection. "
(Revelation 20:6) This indicates that there will be another resurrection.
It will be an earthly one.
The Bible teaches that under the rule of God’s Kingdom, "death will be no more. "
(Revelation 21:​3, 4) This promise must apply to the earth, since death has never existed in heaven.
Misconception: Each person chooses whether he or she will receive life in heaven or on earth.
Fact: God determines which faithful Christians receive "the prize of the upward call, " that is, the hope of heavenly life.
(Philippians 3:​14) Personal desire or ambition has no bearing on a person’s being chosen.​ Matthew 20:20-​23.
Misconception: The hope of everlasting life on earth is an inferior one, offered only to those not worthy of going to heaven.
Fact: God calls those who will receive everlasting life on earth "my people, " "my chosen ones, " and "those blessed by Jehovah. "
(Isaiah 65:21-​23) They will have the privilege of fulfilling God’s original purpose for humankind​ everlasting life in perfection on a paradise earth.​ Genesis 1:​28; Psalm 115:16; Isaiah 45:18.
Misconception: The number 144,000 mentioned in Revelation is symbolic, not literal.
Fact: Although Revelation contains symbolic numbers, some of the numbers it uses are literal.
For example, it speaks of "the 12 names of the 12 apostles of the Lamb. "
(Revelation 21:14) Consider the evidence for concluding that the number 144,000 should likewise be taken literally.
Revelation 7:4 records "the number of those who were sealed [or, confirmed for life in heaven], 144,000. "
In the immediate context of this verse, a second group is contrasted: "a great crowd, which no man was able to number. "
Those of the "great crowd " also receive salvation from God.
(Revelation 7:​9, 10) If the number 144,000 were symbolic, referring instead to a group without number, then the contrast between the two groups would be lost.
In addition, the 144,000 are described as being "bought from among mankind as firstfruits. "
(Revelation 14:4) The expression "firstfruits " refers to a small representative selection.
It aptly describes those who will rule in heaven with Christ over an undetermined number of subjects on earth.​ Revelation 5:​10.
Is the Devil Real?
Yes, the Devil is real.
He is "the ruler of the world, " a spirit creature who became wicked and rebelled against God.
(John 14:30; Ephesians 6:11, 12) The Bible reveals the Devil’s personality through these names and descriptions:
Satan, which means "Resister. " Job 1:6. Devil, which means "Slanderer. "
Revelation 12:9.
Serpent, which is used in the Bible to mean "Deceiver. " 2 Corinthians 11:3.
Tempter. Matthew 4:3.
Liar. John 8:44.
Not a principle or quality of evil
Some view Satan the Devil as just a principle or quality of evil that exists inside us.
However, the Bible records a conversation between God and Satan.
God is perfect, so he could not have been talking to an evil part of himself.
(Deuteronomy 32:4; Job 2:1-6) Likewise, Satan tempted Jesus, who is free of sin.
(Matthew 4:8-10; 1 John 3:5) Thus, the Bible shows that the Devil is real and not merely a personification of evil.
Should we be surprised that many people don’t believe that the Devil is real?
Not at all, for the Bible says that Satan uses deception to accomplish his aims.
(2 Thessalonians 2:9, 10) One of his greatest tricks has been to blind many people to his existence. 2 Corinthians 4:4.
More misconceptions about the Devil
Myth: Lucifer is another name for the Devil.
Fact: The Hebrew word that in some Bibles is translated "Lucifer " means "shining one. "
(Isaiah 14:12) The context shows that this term refers to the dynasty, or line of kings, of Babylon, which God would humiliate for its arrogance.
(Isaiah 14:4, 13-20) The expression "shining one " was used to mock the Babylonian dynasty after it was overthrown.
Myth: Satan works for God as a "prosecuting attorney. "
Fact: The Devil is God’s enemy, not his servant.
Satan the Devil opposes and falsely accuses people who serve God.​ 1 Peter 5:8; Revelation 12:10.
Did God Create the Devil?
The Bible shows that God did not create the Devil.
Instead, He created the person who became the Devil.
Regarding God, the Bible says: "Perfect is his activity, for all his ways are justice.
A God of faithfulness, with whom there is no injustice; righteous and upright is he. " (Deuteronomy 32:3-5) From that statement, we can conclude that Satan the Devil was at one time perfect and righteous, namely, one of God’s angelic sons.
At John 8:44, Jesus said that the Devil "did not stand fast in the truth, " implying that Satan had at one time been truthful and guiltless.
However, like the rest of Jehovah’s intelligent creatures, the angel who became Satan had the freedom to choose between right and wrong.
By choosing a course in opposition to God and inciting the first human couple to join him, he made himself Satan, which means "Resister. " Genesis 3:1-5; Revelation 12:9.
Where Does the Devil Live?
As a spirit creature, the Devil lives in an invisible realm.
However, this is not in a fiery hell where he makes the wicked suffer, as is depicted in the artwork accompanying this article.
"War in heaven "
For a time, Satan the Devil moved about in the spirit realm at will, including entering directly before God alongside the faithful angels.
(Job 1:6) But the Bible foretold that there would be a "war in heaven " that would result in Satan’s being expelled from heaven and "cast out into the earth. "
(Revelation 12:7-9, King James Version) Both Bible chronology and world events confirm that this war in heaven has already taken place.
The Devil is now confined to the vicinity of the earth.
Does this mean that the Devil lives in a specific place on our planet?
For example, the ancient city of Pergamum was said to be "where the throne of Satan is " and "where Satan is dwelling. "
(Revelation 2:13) Actually, these expressions likely refer to the concentration of satanic worship in that city.
The Bible says that the Devil rules over "all the kingdoms of the inhabited earth, " so he does not dwell in any one physical location on earth but is confined to the vicinity of the earth.​ Luke 4:​5, 6.
Can the Devil Control Humans?
The Devil and the demons influence mankind so much that the Bible says: “The Evil One controls the whole world.” (1 John 5:​19, New Century Version) The Bible identifies ways that the Devil exerts this influence on people.
Deception.
The Bible encourages Christians to “fight against the devil’s evil tricks.”
(Ephesians 6:​11, NCV ) One of his tricks is to deceive people into believing that his agents are actually servants of God.​—2 Corinthians 11:13-​15.
Spiritism.
The Devil misleads people through spirit mediums, fortune-tellers, and those who practice divination or astrology.
(Deuteronomy 18:10-​12) Drug use, hypnotism, and meditation techniques that empty the mind also expose a person to demon control.​—Luke 11:24-​26.
False religion.
Religions that teach false doctrines mislead people into disobeying God.
(1 Corinthians 10:20) The Bible calls such false beliefs “teachings of demons.”​—1 Timothy 4:1.
Possession.
The Bible records cases of evil spirits taking control of individuals.
Sometimes demon-possessed people were struck blind or mute or even injured themselves.​—Matthew 12:22; Mark 5:​2-5.
How to avoid the Devil’s influence
You need not live in dread of demon control, for the Bible shows how you can successfully oppose the Devil:
Learn to recognize the Devil’s methods so that you are “not ignorant of his designs.”​—2 Corinthians 2:​11.
Take in knowledge from the Bible, and then apply what you learn.
Applying Bible principles will protect you from the Devil’s influence.​—Ephesians 6:​11-​18.
Get rid of anything connected with demon activity.
(Acts 19:19) That includes music, books, magazines, posters, and videos that encourage spiritism.
Is the Devil the Cause of All Suffering?
The Bible reveals that Satan the Devil is a real person who, like a powerful criminal kingpin, sees to it that his will is accomplished through "lying signs " and "deception. " In fact, he "keeps transforming himself into an angel of light, " says the Bible.
(2 Thessalonians 2:9, 10; 2 Corinthians 11:14) The Devil’s existence can be perceived by the damage he causes.
However, the Devil is not responsible for all suffering.
Why not?
God created humans with the capacity to choose between doing good and doing bad.
(Joshua 24:15) When we make poor choices, we reap bad consequences.
Galatians 6:7, 8.
Are Demons Real?
Demons are "angels that sinned, " spirit creatures who rebelled against God.
(2 Peter 2:4) The first angel to make himself into a demon was Satan the Devil, whom the Bible calls "the ruler of the demons. " Matthew 12:24, 26.
Rebellion in Noah’s day
The Bible records a rebellion by angels before the Flood of Noah’s day: "The sons of the true God began to notice the daughters of men, that they were good-looking; and they went taking wives for themselves, namely, all whom they chose. "
(Genesis 6:2) Those wicked, or fallen, angels "forsook their own proper dwelling place " in heaven and materialized human bodies in order to have sex with women.
Jude 6. When the Flood came, the rebellious angels abandoned their human bodies and returned to heaven.
However, God expelled them from his family.
As part of their punishment, the demons are prevented from ever again taking on human form. Ephesians 6:11, 12.
What Is the Meaning of Life?
The question of the meaning of life may be asked in many ways, such as Why are we here? or Does my life have a purpose?
The Bible shows that our purpose in life is to build a friendship with God.
Consider some of these fundamental truths that the Bible reveals.
God is our Creator.
The Bible says: "It is [God] that has made us, and not we ourselves. "​ Psalm 100:3; Revelation 4:11.
God has a purpose for everything he creates, including us.​ Isaiah 45:18.
God created us with a "spiritual need, " which includes the desire to find meaning in life.
(Matthew 5:3) He wants us to satisfy that desire.​ Psalm 145:16.
We fill our spiritual need by building a friendship with God.
Although the idea of being God’s friend might seem far-fetched to some, the Bible gives us this encouragement: "Draw close to God, and he will draw close to you. "​ James 4:8; 2:23.
To become God’s friend, we must live in harmony with his purpose for us.
The Bible states this purpose at Ecclesiastes 12:13: "Have reverence for God, and obey his commands, because this is all that we were created for. "​ Good News Translation.
In the future, we can experience in full God’s original purpose for us when he eliminates suffering and grants everlasting life to his friends, those who worship him.​ Psalm 37:10, 11.
How Can You Live Forever?
The Bible promises: "The person who does what God wants lives forever. " (1 John 2:​17, Holy Bible​ Easy-to-Read Version) What does God want you to do?
Learn about God and his Son, Jesus.
In prayer to God, Jesus said: "This means everlasting life, their coming to know you, the only true God, and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ. "
(John 17:3) What is involved in "coming to know " God and Jesus?
We can get to know them by studying the Bible and applying its message in our life.
The Bible reveals the thinking of our Creator, Jehovah God, who is the Giver of life.
(Acts 17:24, 25) The Bible also tells us about his Son, Jesus, who taught "sayings of everlasting life. "​ John 6:​67-​69.
Exercise faith in the ransom sacrifice of Jesus.
Jesus came to earth "to minister and to give his life as a ransom. "
(Matthew 20:28) Jesus’ ransom sacrifice opened the way for humans to live forever in Paradise on earth.
(Psalm 37:29) Jesus said: "God loved the world so much that he gave his only-begotten Son, so that everyone exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life. "
(John 3:​16) Note that more is required than simply believing in Jesus.
We must ‘exercise faith in him,’ choosing to live in harmony with his teachings and with the will of his Father.​ Matthew 7:​21; James 2:​17.
Build a strong friendship with God.
God wants us to draw close to him and become his friend.
(James 2:​23; 4:8) God is eternal.
He will never die, and he wants his friends to live forever as well.
Through his Word, God expresses what he wants for all who seek him: "May you enjoy life forever. "​ Psalm 22:26.
Misconceptions About Living Forever
Misconception: Human efforts will result in everlasting life.
Fact: Although some medical advances promise to increase the human life span, such efforts will not lead to everlasting life.
Only God can give us everlasting life, because only he is "the source of life. "
(Psalm 36:9) He promises to "swallow up death forever " and grant everlasting life to all faithful humans.​ Isaiah 25:8; 1 John 2:​25.
Misconception: Only people of certain races will live forever.
Fact: God does not show favoritism.
On the contrary, "in every nation the man who fears him and does what is right is acceptable to him. "
(Acts 10:34, 35) People of all ethnic and cultural backgrounds who obey God can live forever.
Misconception: Everlasting life will be boring.
Fact: The offer of everlasting life comes from God, who loves us and wants us to be happy.
(James 1:​17; 1 John 4:8) He knows that in order for us to be happy, we need purposeful work.
(Ecclesiastes 3:​12) God promises that those who live forever on earth will have satisfying, meaningful work that will benefit them and their loved ones.​ Isaiah 65:22, 23.
Moreover, those who live forever will continue to learn new things about their Creator and his vast creative works.
He made humans with a desire to live forever and to learn about him, though they "will never find out the work that the true God has made from start to finish. "
(Ecclesiastes 3:​10, 11) Thus, those who live forever will always have interesting things to learn and do.
What Is the Soul?
The word "soul " in the Bible is a translation of the Hebrew word nephesh and the Greek word psykhe.
The Hebrew word literally means "a creature that breathes, " and the Greek word means "a living being. "
The soul, then, is the entire creature, not something inside that survives the death of the body.
Consider how the Bible shows that the human soul is the whole person:
Adam, a living soul, at the time of his creation
Adam was not given a soul​ he "became a living soul "
When Jehovah God created the first man, Adam, the Bible says that "man became a living soul. " (Genesis 2:7, King James Version) Adam was not given a soul​ he became a living soul, or person.
The Bible says that the soul can work, crave food, eat, obey laws, and touch a dead body.
(Leviticus 5:2; 7:​20; 23:30; Deuteronomy 12:20; Romans 13:1) Those activities involve the entire person.
Is the soul immortal?
No, the soul can die.
Dozens of Bible verses refer to the soul as being mortal.
Here are some examples:
"The soul that sinneth, it shall die. "​ Ezekiel 18:​4, 20, King James Version.
In ancient Israel, the punishment for the most serious offenses was that the "soul shall be cut off. "
(Exodus 12:15, 19; Leviticus 7:​20, 21, 27; 19:8, King James Version) The person would "be put to death. "​ Exodus 31:14, King James Version.
After a person dies, the literal term "dead soul " is used for the corpse in some Bible verses. (Leviticus 21:11, footnote; Numbers 6:6, footnote) Although many Bible translations use the terms "dead body " or "dead person " in those verses, the original Hebrew uses the word nephesh, or "soul. "
"Soul " can mean "life "
The Bible also uses "soul " as a synonym for "life. "
For example, Job 33:22 uses the Hebrew word for "soul " (nephesh) as a parallel for "life. "
Similarly, the Bible shows that a person’s soul, or life, can be risked or lost.​ Exodus 4:​19; Judges 9:​17; Philippians 2:​30.
This use of the word for "soul " helps us to understand verses in which the soul is said to be "going out " or "departing. "
(Genesis 35:18; King James Version) This figure of speech indicates that the person’s life is ending.
Some translations render this expression at Genesis 35:18 as "she breathed her last. "​ Good News Translation; New Jerusalem Bible.
Where belief in an immortal soul comes from
Christian denominations that believe in an immortal soul get this teaching, not from the Bible, but from ancient Greek philosophy.
The Encyclopædia Britannica says: "Biblical references to the soul are related to the concept of breath and establish no distinction between the ethereal soul and the corporeal body.
Christian concepts of a body-soul dichotomy originated with the ancient Greeks. "
God does not condone merging his teachings with human philosophies, such as belief in an immortal soul.
Instead, the Bible warns: "Look out that no one takes you captive by means of the philosophy and empty deception according to human tradition. "​ Colossians 2:8.
Whose Names Are Written in "the Book of Life "?
"The book of life, " also called "the scroll of life " or "book of remembrance, " contains the names of people in line to receive the gift of everlasting life.
(Revelation 3:5; 20:12; Malachi 3:16) God determines those names based on a person’s faithful obedience to him.​ John 3:16; 1 John 5:3.
God has kept each of his loyal servants in his memory, as if writing their names down in a book, since "the founding of the world " of mankind.
(Revelation 17:8) The faithful man Abel was apparently the first one whose name was recorded in the book of life.
(Hebrews 11:4) It is not just a cold list of names, though, for the book of life shows us that Jehovah is a loving God who "knows those who belong to him. "​ 2 Timothy 2:19; 1 John 4:8.
Can names be erased from "the book of life "?
God said regarding disobedient people in ancient Israel: "Whoever has sinned against me, I shall wipe him out of my book. " (Exodus 32:33) But if we prove faithful, we will remain in "the scroll of life. "​ Revelation 20:12.
Why Do People Die?
It’s natural to wonder why people die, especially when we lose someone close to us.
The Bible says: "The sting producing death is sin. "​ 1 Corinthians 15:56.
Why do all people sin and die?
The first humans, Adam and Eve, lost their lives because they sinned against God.
(Genesis 3:17-19) Death was the only possible outcome of their rebellion against God, for with him is "the source of life. "​ Psalm 36:9; Genesis 2:17.
Adam passed on the defect of sin to all his descendants.
The Bible says: "Through one man sin entered into the world and death through sin, and thus death spread to all men because they had all sinned. "
(Romans 5:12) All people die because they all sin.​ Romans 3:23.
How death will be eliminated
God promises a time when "he will actually swallow up death forever. "
(Isaiah 25:8) To remove death, he must eliminate its root cause, which is sin.
God will do this through Jesus Christ, who "takes away the sin of the world. "​ John 1:29; 1 John 1:7.
What Happens When You Die?
The Bible says: "The living are conscious that they will die; but as for the dead, they are conscious of nothing at all. "
(Ecclesiastes 9:5; Psalm 146:4) Therefore, when we die, we cease to exist.
The dead can’t think, act, or feel anything.
"To dust you will return "
God explained what happens when we die when he spoke to the first man, Adam.
Because Adam was disobedient, God said to him: "Dust you are and to dust you will return. " (Genesis 3:19) Before God created Adam "out of dust from the ground, " Adam did not exist.
(Genesis 2:7) Likewise, when Adam died, he returned to dust and ceased to exist.
The same thing happens to those who die now.
Speaking of both humans and animals, the Bible says: "They have all come to be from the dust, and they are all returning to the dust. "​ Ecclesiastes 3:19, 20.
Death is not necessarily the end of everything
The Bible often compares death to sleep.
(Psalm 13:3; John 11:11-14; Acts 7:60) A person who is fast asleep is unaware of what is happening around him.
Likewise, the dead are not conscious of anything.
Yet, the Bible teaches that God can awaken the dead as if from sleep and give them life again.
(Job 14:13-15) For those whom God resurrects, death is not the end of everything.
What Does the Bible Say About Cremation?
The Bible contains no specific direction on the practice of cremation.
There is no Bible command regarding either burial or cremation of the dead.
The Bible does report instances of faithful servants of God burying their dead.
For example, Abraham went to great lengths to secure a burial place for his wife, Sarah.​ Genesis 23:​2-​20; 49:29-​32.
The Bible also mentions faithful individuals burning the remains of the dead.
For example, when King Saul of Israel and three of his sons were killed in battle, their corpses initially remained in enemy territory and were treated dishonorably.
Hearing of the situation, faithful Israelite warriors retrieved the bodies of Saul and his sons, burned them, and buried the remains.
(1 Samuel 31:​8-​13) The Bible indicates that this was an acceptable way to treat the remains of those men.​ 2 Samuel 2:​4-6.
Common misconceptions about cremation
Misconception: Cremation dishonors the body.
Fact: The Bible says that those who die return to the dust, which is what naturally happens to a corpse when it decomposes.
(Genesis 3:​19) Cremation speeds up the process by reducing the body to ashes, or dust.
Misconception: In Bible times, only people in God’s disfavor were burned after death.
Fact: The dead bodies of some unfaithful people, such as Achan and his family, were burned.
(Joshua 7:​25) However, this was an exception rather than the rule.
(Deuteronomy 21:22, 23) As noted earlier, the bodies of even some faithful people, such as King Saul’s son Jonathan, were burned after death.
Misconception: Cremation prevents God from resurrecting a person.
Fact: Regarding resurrection of the dead, it does not matter to God whether a person’s body was buried, cremated, lost at sea, or eaten by wild animals.
(Revelation 20:13) The Almighty can easily re-create a new body for the person.​ 1 Corinthians 15:35, 38.
Cremation or Burial?​ How to Decide
When deciding how to dispose of a dead body, consider the following factors.
The wishes of the deceased.
The Bible records instances in which family members respected the instructions a person gave regarding treatment of his body after his death.​ Genesis 50:​4, 5; Exodus 13:19.
Local customs.
These often have a bearing on how dead bodies are treated.
(John 19:40) For instance, in Bible times, people customarily buried the dead.
(Genesis 49:31; 1 Samuel 28:3) Likewise today, a person may choose to deal with the remains of the deceased according to local customs as long as such customs do not conflict with Bible principles.
Legal requirements.
The Bible encourages obedience to secular authorities.
(Romans 13:1) In some areas, the authorities enact laws about the treatment of dead bodies.
For instance, in the case of cremation, some authorities place restrictions on where the ashes may be disposed of.
The feelings of others.
The Scriptures encourage us to look out for the interests of others.
(Philippians 2:4) When deciding how to deal with a dead person’s remains, we might consider these questions: How do other family members feel about cremation or burial of the deceased?
How does the local community view such customs?
Fear of Death​ How Can You Overcome It?
We rightly fear death as an enemy and take reasonable steps to protect our life.
(1 Corinthians 15:26) However, an irrational fear of death based on falsehood or superstition makes people "subject to slavery all through their lives. "
(Hebrews 2:​15) Knowing the truth will free you from a morbid fear of death​ a fear that can rob you of the ability to enjoy life.​ John 8:​32.
The truth about death
The dead are not conscious.
(Psalm 146:4) You need not fear pain or torment after you die, for the Bible compares death to sleep.​ Psalm 13:3; John 11:11-​14.
The dead cannot harm us.
Even formerly violent enemies are "impotent in death. "
(Proverbs 21:16) The Bible says that "their hate and their jealousy have already perished. "​ Ecclesiastes 9:6.
Death is not necessarily the permanent end of our existence.
By means of a resurrection, God will bring back to life people who have died.​ John 5:​28, 29; Acts 24:15.
God promises a time when "death will be no more. "
(Revelation 21:4) Concerning that day, the Bible says: "The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it, " completely free from any fear of dying.​ Psalm 37:29.
Near-Death Experiences​ What Do They Not Mean?
Many people who have come close to dying say that they recall being separated from their body or seeing a bright light or a place of great beauty.
‘Some consider the experience to be a privileged glimpse of another realm of existence,’ states the book Recollections of Death.
Although the Bible doesn’t mention such near-death experiences, it does contain a fundamental truth that shows that they are not visions of the next life.
The dead are unconscious.
The Bible says that the dead "are conscious of nothing at all. "
(Ecclesiastes 9:5) At death we pass, not into another plane of existence or thinking, but into nonexistence.
The teaching that we have an immortal soul that survives after our body dies does not come from the Bible.
(Ezekiel 18:4) Thus, any memories from a near-death experience cannot be glimpses of heaven, hell, or the afterlife.
What did Lazarus say about an afterlife?
The Bible’s account of Lazarus describes an actual death experience: He was resurrected by Jesus after being dead for four days.
(John 11:38-​44) If Lazarus had been enjoying some form of afterlife, it would have been cruel of Jesus to bring him back to life on earth.
However, the Bible records no comments from Lazarus about the afterlife.
Surely Lazarus would have spoken about his afterlife experience if he had had one.
Significantly, Jesus described Lazarus’ death as being like sleep, indicating that while Lazarus was dead, he was conscious of nothing at all.​ John 11:11-​14.
Is Our Time to Die Predetermined?
No, we do not have a predetermined time to die.
Rather than supporting belief in fate, the Bible says that death is often due to "unexpected events. "​ Ecclesiastes 9:​11.
Doesn’t the Bible say that there is "a time to die "?
Yes, Ecclesiastes 3:2 says that there is "a time to be born, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted. "
(King James Version) However, the context of this verse shows that the Bible is discussing the continuing cycles that are common to life.
(Ecclesiastes 3:​1-8) God has not set our personal time to die any more than he forces a farmer to plant at a particular moment.
Instead, the point is that we should avoid being so preoccupied with mundane matters that we neglect our Creator.​ Ecclesiastes 3:​11; 12:​1, 13.
Life can be extended
Despite life’s uncertainties, we can often live longer if we make wise decisions.
The Bible says: "The teaching of the wise one is a source of life to turn one away from the snares of death. "
(Proverbs 13:14) Likewise, Moses told the Israelites that they could "live a long time " if they obeyed God’s commands.
(Deuteronomy 6:2) In contrast, we can carelessly shorten our life by bad or foolish actions.​ Ecclesiastes 7:​17.
No matter how wise or careful we are, though, we cannot escape death.
(Romans 5:​12) Yet, this situation will change, for the Bible promises a time when "death will be no more. "​ Revelation 21:4.
What Is Hell?
Is It a Place of Eternal Torment?
Some Bible translations use the word "hell " for the Hebrew word "Sheol " and the matching Greek word "Hades, " both of which refer to the common grave of mankind.
(Psalm 16:10; Acts 2:​27) Many people believe in a fiery hell, as shown in the religious artwork accompanying this article.
However, the Bible teaches otherwise.
Those in hell are unconscious and so cannot feel pain.
"There is no work nor devising nor knowledge nor wisdom in Sheol. "​ Ecclesiastes 9:​10.
Good people go to hell.
The faithful men Jacob and Job expected to go there.​ Genesis 37:35; Job 14:13.
Death, not torment in a fiery hell, is the penalty for sin.
"He who has died has been acquitted from his sin. "​ Romans 6:7.
Eternal torment would violate God’s justice.
(Deuteronomy 32:4) When the first man, Adam, sinned, God told him that his punishment would simply be to pass out of existence: "Dust you are and to dust you will return. "
(Genesis 3:​19) God would have been lying if he were actually sending Adam to a fiery hell.
God does not even contemplate eternal torment.
The idea that he would punish people in hellfire is contrary to the Bible’s teaching that "God is love. "​ ⁠1 John 4:8; Jeremiah 7:​31.
Who Goes to Hell?
Hell ( "Sheol " and "Hades " in the Bible’s original languages) is simply the grave, not a place of fiery torment.
Who go to hell?
Both good people and bad people.
(Job 14:13; Psalm 9:​17) The Bible says that this common grave of mankind is "the house of meeting for everyone living. "​ Job 30:23.
Even Jesus went to hell when he died.
However, "he was not kept in hell, " because God resurrected him.​ Acts 2:​31, 32, The Bible in Basic English.
Is hell eternal?
All those who go to hell will come back out, brought to life by Jesus through God’s power.
(John 5:​28, 29; Acts 24:15) Speaking of that future resurrection, the prophecy at Revelation 20:13 says that "death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them. "
(King James Version) Once hell has been emptied, it will no longer exist; no one will ever go there again because "death will be no more. "​ Revelation 21:​3, 4; 20:14.
Not everyone who dies goes to hell, though.
The Bible shows that some people become so steeped in wickedness that they are beyond repentance.
(Hebrews 10:26, 27) When such ones die, they go, not to hell, but to Gehenna, which is a symbol of everlasting destruction.
(Matthew 5:​29, 30) For example, Jesus indicated that some of the hypocritical religious leaders in his day would go to Gehenna.​ Matthew 23:27-​33.
Is Purgatory Mentioned in the Bible?
No, it is not.
The Bible does not contain the word "purgatory, " nor does it teach that the souls of those who have died are purified in purgatory.
Consider what the Bible teaches about sin and death and how it contradicts the doctrine of purgatory.
Faith in the blood of Jesus, not time in a so-called purgatory, purifies a person from sin.
The Bible says that "the blood of [God’s] Son Jesus cleanses us from all sin " and that "Jesus Christ . . . freed us from our sins by his blood. " (1 John 1:7; Revelation 1:5, New American Bible) Jesus gave "his life as a ransom for many " to pay for their sins.​ Matthew 20:28, NAB.
People who have died are unconscious.
"The living know that they are to die, but the dead no longer know anything. "
(Ecclesiastes 9:5, NAB) A person who has died cannot feel anything and therefore cannot be cleansed by any fire of purgatory.
There is no punishment for sins after a person dies.
The Bible says that "the wages of sin is death " and that "a dead person has been absolved from sin. "
(Romans 6:​7, 23, NAB) Death is the full and complete punishment for sin.
What is the doctrine of purgatory?
Purgatory is defined in Catholic teaching as the state, place, or condition where the souls of those who die atone for their unforgiven sins and are purified.
According to the Catechism of the Catholic Church, this purification is needed "to achieve the holiness necessary to enter the joy of heaven. "
The Catechism adds that "the tradition of the Church . . . speaks of a cleansing fire, " as depicted in the artwork accompanying this article.
However, this is not a Scriptural teaching.
Where did the doctrine of purgatory come from?
The ancient Greeks believed in Limbo and purgatory.
Influenced by Greek philosophy, Clement of Alexandria asserted that the dead could be cleansed of sin by a purifying fire.
However, it was Pope Gregory the Great who stressed the fire of purgatory as a matter of unquestioned belief, according to The History of Christian Doctrines.
This reference work adds that Gregory, who was pope from 590 to 604 C.E., "is usually called ‘the inventor of purgatory.’
" The Catholic Church defined its official teaching of purgatory at the councils of Lyons (1274) and Florence (1439) and reaffirmed it at the Council of Trent in 1547.
What Is the Resurrection?
In the Bible, the word translated as "resurrection " comes from the Greek anastasis, which means "raising up " or "standing up again. "
A person who is resurrected is raised up from death and restored to life as the person he was before.​ 1 Corinthians 15:12, 13.
Although the word "resurrection " is not in the Hebrew Scriptures, often called the Old Testament, the teaching appears there.
Through the prophet Hosea, for example, God promised: "From the power of the Grave I will redeem them; from death I will recover them. "​ Hosea 13:14; Job 14:13-​15; Isaiah 26:19; Daniel 12:​2, 13.
Where will people be resurrected?
Some people are resurrected to life in heaven to rule as kings with Christ.
(2 Corinthians 5:1; Revelation 5:​9, 10) The Bible calls this "the first resurrection " and "the earlier resurrection, " both expressions implying that there is another resurrection to follow.
(Revelation 20:6; Philippians 3:​11) This later resurrection will be to life on earth, which the vast majority of those brought back to life will enjoy.​ Psalm 37:29.
How are people resurrected?
God grants Jesus the power to raise the dead.
(John 11:25) Jesus will restore "all those in the memorial tombs " to life, each one with his unique identity, personality, and memories.
(John 5:​28, 29) Those resurrected to heaven receive a spirit body, while those resurrected to life on earth receive a healthy physical body, completely sound.​ Isaiah 33:24; 35:​5, 6; 1 Corinthians 15:42-​44, 50.
Who will be resurrected?
The Bible says that "there is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous. "
(Acts 24:15) The righteous include faithful people, such as Noah, Sarah, and Abraham.
(Genesis 6:9; Hebrews 11:11; James 2:​21) The unrighteous include those who failed to meet God’s standards but did not have the opportunity to learn and follow them.
However, those who become so wicked that they are beyond reform will not be resurrected.
When such ones die, they suffer permanent destruction with no hope of a return to life.​ Matthew 23:33; Hebrews 10:26, 27.
When will the resurrection take place?
The Bible foretold that the resurrection to heaven would take place during Christ’s presence, which began in 1914.
(1 Corinthians 15:21-​23) The resurrection to life on earth will occur during the Thousand Year Reign of Jesus Christ, when the earth will be transformed into a paradise.​ Luke 23:43; Revelation 20:​6, 12, 13.
Why is belief in the resurrection reasonable?
The Bible provides detailed accounts of nine resurrections, each confirmed by eyewitnesses.
(1 Kings 17:17-​24; 2 Kings 4:​32-​37; 13:20, 21; Luke 7:​11-​17; 8:​40-​56; John 11:38-​44; Acts 9:​36-​42; Acts 20:​7-​12; 1 Corinthians 15:​3-6) Jesus’ resurrection of Lazarus is especially noteworthy, since Lazarus had been dead for four days and Jesus performed the miracle before a crowd of people.
(John 11:39, 42) Even those who opposed Jesus could not deny the facts of the matter, so instead they plotted to kill both Jesus and Lazarus.​ John 11:47, 53; 12:​9-​11.
Three resurrections as recorded in the Bible: a widow’s child, a Christian woman, and Jesus’ friend Lazarus
The Bible shows that God has both the ability and the desire to bring back the dead.
He keeps in his limitless memory a detailed record of each person he will resurrect by means of his almighty power.
(Job 37:23; Matthew 10:30; Luke 20:37, 38) God is able to restore the dead to life, and he wants to!
Describing the coming resurrection, the Bible says of God: "You will long for the work of your hands. "​ Job 14:15.
Misconceptions about the resurrection
Myth: The resurrection is a reuniting of the soul with the body.
Fact: The Bible teaches that the soul is the entire person, not some part that survives death.
(Genesis 2:7, footnote; Ezekiel 18:4) A person who is resurrected is not reunited with his soul; he is recreated as a living soul.
Myth: Some people are resurrected and then immediately destroyed.
Fact: The Bible says that "those who practiced vile things " will receive "a resurrection of judgment. "
(John 5:​29) However, this judgment is based on what they do after they are resurrected, not before.
Jesus said: "The dead will hear the voice of the Son of God, and those who have paid attention will live. "
(John 5:​25) Those who ‘pay attention’ to, or obey, the things they learn after they are resurrected will have their names recorded in "the scroll of life. "​ Revelation 20:12, 13.
Myth: When resurrected, a person receives exactly the same body that he had before he died.
Fact: After death, a person’s body would likely have broken down and disintegrated.
Ecclesiastes 3:​19, 20.
Does the Bible Teach Reincarnation?
No, it does not.
Neither the word "reincarnation " nor the idea appears in the Bible.
Belief in reincarnation is based on the teaching of the immortality of the soul.
However, the Bible teaches that the soul is the entire person and is thus mortal.
(Genesis 2:7, footnote; Ezekiel 18:4) At death, a person ceases to exist.​ Genesis 3:​19; Ecclesiastes 9:​5, 6.
What is the difference between reincarnation and resurrection?
The Bible’s teaching of the resurrection is not based on the immortality of the soul.
In the resurrection, people who have died will be brought back into existence by God’s power.
(Matthew 22:23, 29; Acts 24:15) The resurrection offers the positive hope of coming back to a new earth with the prospect of never dying again.​ 2 Peter 3:​13; Revelation 21:​3, 4.
Misconceptions about reincarnation and the Bible
Misconception: The Bible says that the prophet Elijah was reincarnated as John the Baptist.
Fact: God foretold: "I am sending to you Elijah the prophet, " and Jesus showed that John the Baptist fulfilled this prophecy.
(Malachi 4:​5, 6; Matthew 11:13, 14) However, this did not mean that Elijah had been reincarnated as John the Baptist.
John himself said that he was not Elijah.
(John 1:​21) Instead, John performed a work like Elijah’s, proclaiming God’s message calling for repentance.
(1 Kings 18:36, 37; Matthew 3:1) John also proved to be "strong and mighty like the prophet Elijah. "​ Luke 1:​13-​17, Good News Translation.
Misconception: The Bible refers to reincarnation as being "born again. "
Fact: The Bible shows that being born again is a spiritual rebirth that takes place while a person is still alive.
(John 1:​12, 13) This rebirth is, not an inevitable consequence of past actions, but a blessing from God, giving those who receive it a unique hope for the future.​ John 3:3; 1 Peter 1:​3, 4.
Do You Use Digital Technology Wisely?
Jenni is hooked on a video game.
"I’m playing it for eight hours a day now, " she says, "and it’s become a real problem. "
Dennis tried to go seven days without his electronic devices and Internet access.
He lasted just 40 hours.
Jenni and Dennis are not teenagers.
Jenni, a mother of four, is 40 years old.
Dennis is 49.
DO YOU use digital technology?
Many would answer yes, and for good reason.
Electronic devices play a prominent and useful role in employment, social life, and entertainment.
However, like Jenni and Dennis, many people seem overly attached to some uses of technology.
For example, 20-year-old Nicole says: "I hate to say it, but my cell phone and I are best buddies.
I make sure it’s close by at all times.
I go crazy if I’m in an area with no cell coverage, and after half an hour, I can’t wait to be able to check my messages again.
It’s a little ridiculous! "
Some people even check a device for messages and updates through the night.
They may experience withdrawal symptoms when they are separated from their digital companion.
Some researchers describe this type of behavior as an addiction whether to digital technology in general or more specifically to the Internet or a particular device, such as a smartphone.
Others hesitate to use the term "addiction " and prefer to describe such behavior as problematic, compulsive, or obsessive.
Regardless of what it is called, unwise use of digital technology can be a problem.
In some cases, it has created a barrier between family members.
For example, a 20-year-old girl laments: "My father doesn’t know about anything going on in my life anymore.
He sits in the living room and writes e-mails while he is talking to me.
He can’t put his phone down.
My dad probably cares about me, but sometimes it just doesn’t seem that he does. "
"Digital Detox "
To help deal with misuse of technology, lands such as China, South Korea, the United Kingdom, and the United States have established "digital detox " centers, where a person is denied access to the Internet and digital devices for several days.
For example, consider Brett, a young adult who says that at one point he was playing an online game for up to 16 hours a day.
"Whenever I went online, it really was like getting high on a drug, " he says.
By the time Brett checked himself into a digital detox center, he was unemployed, had neglected his hygiene, and had lost his friends.
How can you prevent such a sad outcome?
ASSESS YOUR USE OF TECHNOLOGY.
Determine the impact that technology has on your life.
Ask yourself such questions as the following:
Do I become unduly agitated, perhaps even temperamental, when I cannot access the Internet or use my electronic device?
Do I keep using the Internet or device long after the predetermined time I have set to stop?
Am I losing needed sleep because I cannot stop checking for incoming messages?
Is my use of technology causing me to neglect my family?
Would my family members agree with my answer to this question?
If your use of technology is causing you to neglect "the more important things " including your family and other responsibilities now is the time to make changes.
(Philippians 1:10) How?
LEARN TO SET REASONABLE LIMITS.
Too much of even a good thing can be harmful.
So whether you use digital technology for business or for pleasure, limit how long you will do so, and then stick to that limit.
Tip: Why not enlist the help of a family member or a friend?
The Bible says: "Two are better than one, . . . for if one of them falls, the other can help his partner up. "
Do not let attraction lead to "addiction "
As new devices make it easier and faster to access and transmit data, the unwise use of technology will no doubt grow.
But do not let attraction lead to "addiction. "
By "making the best use of your time, " you can avoid misusing digital technology.
Ephesians 5:16.
Animals
In one way or another, nearly everyone’s life is affected by animals.
Are we accountable for the way we treat them?
How should humans treat animals?
Some people believe that animals may be used in any way that humans see fit.
Others feel that animals should be treated in much the same way as humans are.
One prominent animal-rights activist argued that animals should enjoy the "basic right not to be treated exclusively as resources or economic commodities. "
He adds: "We should stop treating nonhuman animals as our property. "
In what many view as an extreme case, billionaire Leona Helmsley left a $12-million trust fund to her dog and willed that the dog’s remains be placed next to hers after its death.
To think about: How do you feel animals should be treated?
The Creator of life, Jehovah God, told humans to "have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and every living creature that is moving on the earth. " (Genesis 1:28) It is reasonable to conclude, then, that God views humans as superior to animals.
This conclusion is reinforced by a significant statement made just before the scripture quoted earlier.
The Bible says that "God went on to create the man in his image, in God’s image he created him; male and female he created them. "
Genesis 1:27. Because humans were created "in God’s image, " we are unique in how we display godly qualities, such as wisdom, justice, and love.
Humans also have an innate capacity for morality and spirituality.
Animals lack such human abilities because they were not created "in God’s image. "
They are inferior and not intended to be treated in the same way as humans are.
Does this mean that humans have the right to mistreat animals?
In his Law to the Israelites, God ensured that animals would be given rest, food, help when distressed, and protection from injury.
Exodus 23:4, 5; Deuteronomy 22:10; 25:4.
"Six days you are to do your work; but on the seventh day, you are to cease from your labor, in order that your bull and your donkey may rest. "
Exodus 23:12. Is it wrong to kill animals?
Some hunters and fishermen kill animals for sport, thrilling in the chase or the conquest.
Others would agree with Russian novelist Leo Tolstoy, who wrote that killing and eating animals is "simply immoral. "
God allows people to kill animals to protect human life or to provide clothing.
(Exodus 21:28; Mark 1:6) The Bible also says that humans may kill animals for food.
"Every moving animal that is alive may serve as food for you, " says Genesis 9:3.
Even Jesus helped his disciples to catch fish that they later ate.
John 21:4-13.
Nevertheless, the Bible says that God "hates anyone who loves violence. "
(Psalm 11:5) So it stands to reason that God does not want us to harm or kill animals merely for pleasure or for sport.
The Bible indicates that God places a high value on animal life.
The Bible says that at the time of creation, "God went on to make the wild animals of the earth according to their kinds and the domestic animals according to their kinds and all the creeping animals of the ground according to their kinds.
And God saw that it was good. " Genesis 1:25.
The Bible says of Jehovah: "To the animals he gives food. "
(Psalm 147:9) God created an ecosystem that provides more than enough adequate food and shelter for animals.
King David of Israel said in prayer: "Man and beast you preserve, O Jehovah. "
(Psalm 36:6) During the global Flood, for example, Jehovah preserved eight individuals and all kinds of animals before destroying the wicked people.
Genesis 6:19.
Clearly, Jehovah approves of his animal creation, and he expects humans to treat animals with due regard.
"The righteous one takes care of his domestic animals. "
Proverbs 12:10.
How to Deal With Loneliness
"I had two girlfriends who would do things together and leave me out.
I constantly heard about what a great time they had.
One time I called my friend’s house while the other girl was there, and when someone else answered the phone, I could hear the two of them in the background, talking and laughing.
I only got to hear the fun, which made me feel even more lonely than I already was! "
Maria.
Have you ever felt left out and lonely?
If so, the Bible has advice that can help you.
First, though, consider a few things you should know about loneliness.
Nearly everyone feels lonely at times.
That includes people who seem to be popular.
Because often it is not the quantity of friends but the quality of friendships that determines whether a person feels lonely.
Someone who seems popular could constantly be surrounded by people but have no real friends and therefore feel lonely.
Loneliness can be hazardous to your health.
Researchers who analyzed the results of 148 studies concluded that low social interaction is a predictor of early death and that as a risk factor, it is "twice as harmful as obesity " and "equivalent to smoking 15 cigarettes a day. "
Loneliness can make you vulnerable.
In fact, it could cause you to settle for anyone who would accept you as a friend.
"When you’re lonely, you may be desperate for attention, " says a young man named Alan.
"You could begin to think that any attention is better than no attention.
And that can lead to trouble. "
Technology does not always cure loneliness.
"I could text or e-mail a hundred people a day and still be incredibly lonely, " says a young woman named Natalie.
A teenager named Tyler feels similarly.
"Texting is like a snack, whereas face-to-face contact is like a meal, " he says.
"Snacks are great, but you need a full meal to feel satisfied. "
Assume the best.
For example, suppose you go to a photo-sharing Web site and see pictures of your friends at a gathering to which you were not invited.
At that moment, you have a choice either to conclude that you were deliberately snubbed or to adopt a more positive outlook.
Since you cannot know all the factors involved, why assume the worst?
Instead, direct your energy toward thinking of a better explanation for your being excluded.
Often, it is not the situation but your outlook that brings on feelings of loneliness.
Bible principle: Proverbs 15:15.
Avoid sweeping assertions.
When you are lonely, you might think, ‘I never get invited anywhere’ or ‘People always avoid me.’
But those sweeping assertions will only make you sink deeper into the quicksand of loneliness.
Such thoughts can create a vicious circle: You feel like an outcast, which makes you isolate yourself, which makes you lonely, which makes you feel like an outcast.
Bible principle: Proverbs 18:1.
Be willing to befriend those who are older than you.
The Bible tells of the life of David, who was likely a teenager when he met Jonathan a man 30 years older than he was.
Despite their age difference, David and Jonathan became close friends.
(1 Samuel 18:1) You could have the same thing happen in your life.
"Recently, I’ve come to appreciate the value of having friends who are older than I am, " says 21-year-old Kiara.
"I have some very dear friends decades older than I am, and I really appreciate their mature view of things and their stability. "
Bible principle: Job 12:12.
Appreciate the benefits of solitude.
Some people feel lonely as soon as they face a moment of privacy.
But simply being alone need not make you feel lonely.
For example, Jesus was sociable, but he also appreciated the value of solitude.
(Matthew 14:23; Mark 1:35) You can do the same.
Instead of seeing your being alone as a disadvantage, use quiet time to reflect appreciatively on your blessings.
That can make you an even more desirable friend to others.
Proverbs 13:20.
"All the days of the afflicted one are bad, but the one with a cheerful heart has a continual feast. "
"Whoever isolates himself . . . rejects all practical wisdom. "
Proverbs 18:1.
"Is not wisdom found among the aged, and does not understanding come with a long life? "
Job 12:12.
Bo
BO
"I think many young people are lonely but try to hide it.
For example, if they text people or communicate through social networks, all those ‘friends’ aren’t really with them and that can make a person feel lonely. "
Abigail
ABIGAIL
"We all have friends who have moved or perhaps for some other reason lost contact with us.
I find it’s good to keep in touch with them, even if they live far away.
Just talking to an old friend can give you a tremendous boost. "
LANDS AND PEOPLES
A Visit to Honduras
A map of Honduras
HONDURAS means "Depths " in Spanish, a word Christopher Columbus may have used to describe the waters along this land’s Atlantic Coast.
Some say that this is how Honduras was given its name.
Hondurans place high value on family loyalty and collaboration.
For example, major decisions such as those regarding household expenses or the education of children are often made by both husband and wife.
Most Hondurans are mestizos, a blend of European and indigenous peoples.
Some indigenous groups still remain, such as the Chortí.
Other native Hondurans, such as the Garifuna, trace their ancestry elsewhere.
A Garifuna musician plays the hardwood drum
A Garifuna musician playing the hardwood drum
The Garifuna are descendants of Africans and Carib Indians who resided on St. Vincent island.
About the year 1797, the Garifuna arrived at Islas de la Bahía (Bay Islands).
Later, they settled along the Caribbean Coast of the Central American mainland.
From there the Garifuna eventually spread throughout other parts of Central and North America.
The Garifuna enjoy lively dances performed to the beat of hardwood drums.
Their culture also includes brightly colored traditional garments, storytelling, and foods such as ereba (a large, thin cake made from cassava root).
There are some 400 congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Honduras.
Meetings are held in Spanish as well as English, Garifuna, Honduras Sign Language, Mandarin Chinese, and Miskito.
An ereba
Ereba, a large, thin cake made from the cassava root
FAST FACTS
Population: 8,111,000
Capital: Tegucigalpa
Government: Democratic republic
Language: Spanish
Climate: Subtropical, milder in the mountains
Land: Over 75 percent of the mainland is mountainous.
There are also low coastal plains and islands
Discipline That Works
UNDENIABLY, parenting is hard work.
But holding back discipline when it is warranted makes the task even harder.
Because without discipline (1) children continue to be unruly, which exhausts the parents, and (2) parents give inconsistent direction, which confuses the children.
On the other hand, loving, balanced discipline can train a child’s thinking and shape his moral character.
It also helps children feel secure as they grow to responsible adulthood.
But where can you find reliable guidance for disciplining your children?
The Value of Bible Principles
The publishers of this magazine, Jehovah’s Witnesses, believe that the Bible is, as it claims to be, "beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for correcting, for disciplining. " (2 Timothy 3:16, footnote) The Bible is far more than a mere parenting manual; its principles provide realistic guidance for families.
Consider some examples.
THE BIBLE SAYS: "Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a child. "
Proverbs 22:15, footnote.
Although children can be delightfully thoughtful and kind, they are also inclined to do foolish things.
Therefore, children need discipline.
(Proverbs 13:24) Acknowledging that fact will help you fulfill your responsibility as a parent.
THE BIBLE SAYS: "Do not hold back discipline from a child. "
Proverbs 23:13, footnote.
A mother and daughter laugh together
You need not fear that balanced discipline will damage your children or cause them to resent you later in life.
When lovingly administered, discipline will help your children learn to accept correction humbly a skill they will need even as adults.
Hebrews 12:11.
THE BIBLE SAYS: "Whatever a person is sowing, this he will also reap. "
Galatians 6:7.
Parents naturally want to protect their children, and rightly so.
Again, however, balance is needed.
You do your children no favors by "rescuing " them from the consequences of their errors or by defending them when a teacher or another adult brings real misconduct to your attention.
Instead, view those people as your allies.
In so doing, you teach your child to respect authority including yours.
Colossians 3:20.
THE BIBLE SAYS: "A child left unrestrained brings shame on his mother. "
Proverbs 29:15.
Be loving, consistent, and reasonable
While parents should never be abusive, they also need to avoid the other extreme that of being permissive.
"Children of permissive parents have little sense that the adults in the house are the ones who are in charge, " says the book The Price of Privilege.
If you do not assume your authority, your child may well assume that he is at the helm.
Inevitably, he will make unwise choices that will cause him and you grief.
Proverbs 17:25; 29:21.
THE BIBLE SAYS: "A man will . . . stick to his wife, and the two will be one flesh. "
Matthew 19:5.
According to the Bible, a man and woman should be married before children are conceived and should still be together after the children are grown and gone.
(Matthew 19:5, 6) In that sense, you are a spouse first a parent second.
If your priorities are reversed, however, your child could come to "think more of himself than it is necessary to think. "
(Romans 12:3) A "child-centered " family also weakens the marriage relationship.
Help for Parents
For you to accomplish your goal as a parent, your discipline should adhere to these principles.
Be loving.
"Do not be provoking your children, so that they do not become downhearted. "
Colossians 3:21, footnote.
Be consistent.
"Let your word ‘Yes’ mean yes, your ‘No,’ no. "
Matthew 5:37.
Be reasonable.
"I will discipline you to the proper degree. "
Jeremiah 30:11.
COVER SUBJECT
Whatever Happened to Discipline?
In recent decades, family life in Western lands has changed dramatically.
At one time, parents were in charge and children followed their lead.
Now, in some households it seems to be the other way around.
For example, consider the following scenarios, all of which are based on typical situations.
While at the store with his mother, a four-year-old boy reaches out for a toy. His mother tries to dissuade him.
"You have enough toys already, don’t you? "
Too late, she realizes that she should not have ended on a question.
"But I want it! " the boy whines. Fearing a tantrum his usual ploy Mom gives in.
A five-year-old girl interrupts her father as he is talking to another adult.
"I’m bored, " she announces. "I want to go home! "
Her father stops mid-sentence, stoops down to his daughter, and asks in a soothing voice: "Just a few more minutes, Sweetie OK? "
Once again, 12-year-old James has been accused of shouting at his teacher.
James’ father is upset not at his son but at the teacher.
"She’s always picking on you, " he says to James.
"I’m going to report her to the school board! "
The preceding scenarios are imaginary, but they are hardly far-fetched.
They illustrate a real problem that exists in homes where parents tolerate children’s rudeness, cave in to their demands, and "rescue " them from the consequences of their misconduct.
"It is increasingly common to see parents relinquishing authority to young children, " says the book The Narcissism Epidemic.
"Not that long ago, kids knew who the boss was and it wasn’t them. "
Of course, many parents do strive to teach their children proper values, not only by setting a good example but also by giving firm but loving correction when needed.
Nevertheless, parents who recognize the value of doing so are, as the book quoted earlier puts it, "swimming against the cultural tide. "
How did things get to this point?
Whatever happened to discipline?
Parental Authority Weakens
Some say that a weakening of parental authority began in the 1960’s, when so-called experts were urging parents to be more easygoing with their children.
They said: ‘Be a friend, not an authority figure.’
‘Praise is better than discipline.’
‘Rather than correct the bad, catch your children in the act of doing good.’
Instead of striking a balance between commendation and correction, experts seemed to imply that reprimanding children would damage their fragile emotions and cause them to resent their parents later in life.
Before long, experts were also heralding the virtues of self-esteem.
It was as if the secret to good parenting was suddenly discovered, and it was simply this: Make your children feel good about themselves.
Of course, it is important to instill confidence in children.
But the self-esteem movement took things to an extreme.
Experts told parents: ‘Avoid using negative words such as no and bad.’
‘Keep telling your children that they are special and that they can be anything they want to be.’
It was as if feeling good was more important than being good.
Parents offer excessive praise to their son as he sits on a throne
The self-esteem movement has done little more than make children feel entitled
In the end, some say that the self-esteem movement has done little more than make children feel entitled, as if the world owes them.
It has also left many young ones "ill prepared for the inevitable criticism and occasional failure that is real life, " says the book Generation Me.
One father quoted in that book put it this way: "There is no self-esteem movement in the work world. . . .
If you present a bad report at the office, your boss isn’t going to say, ‘Hey, I like the color paper you chose.’
Setting kids up like this is doing them a tremendous disservice. "
Shifting Opinions
Over the decades, parenting practices have often reflected the ever-shifting opinions of humans.
"Discipline keeps changing, " writes educator Ronald G. Morrish.
"It reflects changes in our society. "
It is so easy for parents to be, as the Bible puts it, "tossed about as by waves and carried here and there by every wind of teaching. "
Ephesians 4:14.
Clearly, the current wave of relaxed discipline has had negative effects.
It has not only weakened parental authority but also left children without the guidance they need to make good choices and approach life with genuine confidence.
Is there a better way?
Teaching the Wrong Lessons?
Put yourself in the following situations.
You are a ‘soccer mom.’ After school and on weekends, you ferry your son and daughter from one activity to another: skating lessons, piano lessons, soccer practice anything to keep them active.
‘I’m exhausted,’ you say to yourself, ‘but my kids know that they are my life and that I would do anything for them.
Isn’t that what it takes to be a good mom?’
Consider: What lessons are your children really learning by having a mother who will wear herself out just to keep them involved?
In time, might your children come to believe that adults parents in particular are here only to serve their children’s needs?
A better approach: Let your children see that you have needs too.
This will teach them to have consideration for others including you.
You were raised by a harsh and critical father, so you have resolved to be the opposite with your children.
At every opportunity you praise your two boys even when they have done nothing at all that was praiseworthy.
‘It’s important to make them feel good about themselves,’ you tell yourself.
‘If they feel special, they’ll have the confidence they need to succeed in life.’
Consider: What lessons are your sons really learning by receiving ‘empty praise’ praise that is doled out just to make them feel good?
How might overemphasis on your boys’ self-esteem hurt them, both now and later in life?
A better approach: Be balanced.
Do not be overly critical of your children; at the same time, base your praise on actual effort.
You are the mother of two girls, ages six and five.
The older girl tends to be hotheaded.
Just yesterday, in a flash of anger, she punched her little sister in the arm.
You reflect on how you handled the situation.
‘I chose to reason with her rather than to reprimand her,’ you recall.
‘After all, won’t it damage my daughter if I tell her that she was being bad?’
Consider: Is reasoning alone enough for a six-year-old?
Is it really harmful to use the word "bad " to describe the act of hitting a sibling?
A better approach: Impose appropriate consequences for misbehavior.
When administered in a loving manner, discipline will help your children learn to adjust their behavior.
FIND RELIEF FROM STRESS
Are You Stressed?
"Everyone has stress to some degree, yet I am overwhelmed with stress.
It is not from just one big problem but from many situations, from struggles, and from seemingly unending years of caring for my physically and mentally ill husband. "​ Jill.
"My wife left me, and I had to raise two children on my own.
It was hard being a single parent.
On top of that, I lost my job and I couldn’t afford to get my vehicle inspected for registration.
I had no idea how to handle things.
The stress was overwhelming.
I knew deep down that it was wrong to kill myself, so I begged God to end my misery. "​ Barry.
Like Jill and Barry, do you sometimes feel overwhelmed with stress?
If so, may the following articles comfort and help you.
They examine common causes of stress, how stress can affect us, and how we can get at least a measure of stress relief.
What Causes Stress?
"Most adults report being under increasing levels of stress, " says the well-known Mayo Clinic.
"Modern life is filled with change and uncertainty. "
Consider just some of the changes and uncertainties that contribute to stress:
divorce
the death of a loved one
severe illness
serious accidents
crime
a hectic pace of life
disasters​ natural or man-made
pressures at school or work
worries about employment and financial security
"THE LOSS OF A JOB, "
says the American Psychological Association, "can be devastating, putting unemployed workers at risk for physical illness, marital strain, anxiety, depression and even suicide.
Loss of a job affects every part of life. "
STRESS IN EARLY CHILDHOOD
It is not uncommon for children to suffer from stress.
Some are bullied at school or neglected at home.
Others are abused physically, emotionally, or sexually.
Many are anxious about exams and school grades.
Still others see their family torn apart by divorce.
Stressed children may have nightmares, learning difficulties, depression, or a tendency to be withdrawn.
Some seem unable to control their emotions.
A child suffering from stress needs urgent help.
Previous
Next
What Is Stress?
Stress is your body’s response to a demanding situation.
Your brain causes hormones to flood your system.
These increase your heart rate, regulate your blood pressure, expand or constrict the capacity of your lungs, and tense your muscles.
Before you are fully aware of what is happening, your body is primed for action.
When a stressful episode is over, your body comes off "high alert " and returns to normal.
GOOD AND BAD STRESS
Stress is a natural response that enables you to deal with challenging or dangerous situations.
The stress response begins in your brain.
Beneficial stress enables you to act or react quickly.
A certain amount of stress can also help you to reach your goals or to perform better, perhaps during an exam, a job interview, or a sporting event.
However, prolonged, extreme, or chronic stress can harm you.
When your body is repeatedly or constantly on "high alert, " you may begin to suffer physically, emotionally, and mentally.
Your behavior, including the way you treat others, may change.
Chronic stress can also lead to substance abuse and other unhealthy means of coping.
It may even spiral into depression, burnout, or thoughts of suicide.
While stress may not affect everyone in the same way, it can contribute to a wide range of diseases.
And it can affect nearly every part of the body.
HOW STRESS CAN AFFECT YOUR BODY
Nervous system.
A man, holding his hand to his forehead, feeling the effects of stress.
Your nervous system causes hormones such as adrenaline and cortisol to be released.
These increase your heart rate, your blood pressure, and the glucose levels in your blood​ all of which enable you to respond quickly to danger.
Too much stress can lead to
irritability, anxiety, depression, headaches, insomnia
Musculoskeletal system.
Your muscles tense up to protect you from injury.
body aches and pains, tension headaches, muscle spasms
Respiratory system.
You breathe faster to take in more oxygen.
Too much stress can lead to
hyperventilation and shortness of breath, as well as panic attacks in those who are prone to them
Cardiovascular system.
Your heart beats faster and harder to distribute blood throughout your body.
Blood vessels dilate or constrict to direct blood where your body needs it the most, such as in your muscles.
high blood pressure, heart attack, stroke
Endocrine system.
Your glands produce the hormones adrenaline and cortisol, which help the body react to stress.
Your liver increases your blood-sugar level to give you more energy.
diabetes, lower immunity and increased illness, mood swings, weight gain
Gastrointestinal system.
The way your body processes food is disrupted.
Too much stress can lead to
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation
Reproductive system.
Stress can affect sexual desire and function.
impotence, disrupted menstrual cycle
How to Deal With Stress
To deal effectively with stress, you need to think about your physical health, the way you interact with others, and your goals and priorities in life​ that is, what you consider to be truly important.
This article will review some practical principles that can help you to deal better with stress and perhaps even reduce it.
Try to Live One Day at a Time
A happy and confident woman walking in a big city.
"Never be anxious about the next day, for the next day will have its own anxieties. "​ MATTHEW 6:34.
Meaning: Daily anxieties are a part of life.
But do not increase today’s anxieties by adding tomorrow’s to them.
Try to live one day at a time.
Stress can cause anxiety.
So try this: First, recognize that some stress is inevitable.
Fretting over things you cannot prevent increases your stress.
Second, understand that quite often things do not turn out the way we may fear they will.
Set Reasonable Standards
"The wisdom from above is . . . reasonable. "​ JAMES 3:17.
Meaning: Do not be a perfectionist.
Avoid setting unrealistically high standards for yourself or others.
Be modest, set reasonable standards, and know both your limitations and those of others.
When you do this, you will reduce stress all around and even encourage greater success.
Also, keep a sense of humor.
When you laugh​ even when something goes wrong ​you relieve tension and brighten your mood.
Know What Stresses You
"A discerning man will remain calm. "​ PROVERBS 17:27.
Meaning: Negative emotions can cloud clear thinking, so try to stay calm.
Identify what stresses you, and note your response.
For example, when you feel stressed, note your thoughts, feelings, and behavior, perhaps even making a record of them.
By becoming more aware of your response to stress, you may be able to deal with it more effectively.
Also, think of ways to eliminate stressful things from your life.
If that is unrealistic, look for ways to reduce their impact, perhaps by managing your tasks or time more efficiently.
Try to see things in a different light.
What stresses you may not stress someone else.
The difference may be in viewpoint.
Consider these three suggestions:
Do not be quick to assume bad motives.
A person may cut ahead of you in a line.
If you attribute his act to rudeness, you may become upset.
Instead, why not assume that his motive was good?
You may be right!
See the positive side of a situation.
A long wait at a doctor’s office or an airport is easier to bear if you use the time to do some reading or to catch up on work or e-mail.
Keep the big picture in mind.
Ask yourself, ‘Will this problem be a big issue tomorrow or next week?’
Distinguish between minor or short-term issues and more serious ones.
Try to Be Orderly
A woman holding her smartphone, using a daily planning application.
"Let all things take place decently and by arrangement. "​ 1 CORINTHIANS 14:40.
Meaning: Try to maintain order in your life.
We like a reasonable amount of order in life.
One thing that can contribute to disorder​ and stress ​is procrastination, and this may lead to a growing list of unfinished tasks.
Why not try these two suggestions?
Make a practical schedule, and stick to it.
Identify and correct any attitudes that cause you to procrastinate.
Pursue a Balanced Lifestyle
"Better is a handful of rest than two handfuls of hard work and chasing after the wind. "​ ECCLESIASTES 4:6.
Meaning: Workaholics can deprive themselves of the benefits of their "two handfuls of hard work. "
They may have no time or energy left to enjoy what they worked for.
Have a realistic view of work and money.
More money does not mean more happiness or less stress.
In fact, the opposite can be true.
"The plenty belonging to the rich one does not permit him to sleep, " says Ecclesiastes 5:12.
So try to live within your means.
Make time to relax.
You relieve stress when you do things you enjoy.
However, passive recreation, such as watching TV, may not help.
Keep technology in its place.
Avoid constantly checking e-mail, texts, or social media sites.
Unless circumstances require it, do not check work-related e-mail outside of working hours.
Take Care of Your Health
A young man smiling as he is running outdoors.
"Physical training is beneficial. "​ 1 TIMOTHY 4:8.
Meaning: Regular exercise promotes better health.
Develop healthful habits.
Physical activity can lift your mood and improve your body’s response to stress.
Eat nutritious food, and try to avoid skipping meals.
Be sure to get enough rest.
Avoid harmful "solutions " to stress, such as smoking or drug and alcohol abuse.
In the long run, these heighten stress, perhaps by robbing you of your health and hard-earned money.
See your doctor if your stress becomes overwhelming.
Getting professional help is not an admission of failure.
"KILL YOUR STRESS WITH KINDNESS "
"A kind man benefits himself, but the cruel person brings trouble on himself. "​ PROVERBS 11:17.
The book Overcoming Stress has a chapter entitled "Kill Your Stress with Kindness. "
Treating others kindly, according to the author, Dr. Tim Cantopher, can promote health and happiness.
On the other hand, an unkind or cruel person makes himself unhappy because he alienates himself from others.
We may also get stress relief by treating ourselves kindly.
For example, we should not make harsh or unrealistic demands on ourselves.
Nor should we belittle or malign ourselves.
"You must love your neighbor as yourself, " Jesus Christ said.​ Mark 12:31.
Set Priorities
"Make sure of the more important things. "​ PHILIPPIANS 1:10.
Meaning: Carefully consider your priorities.
List your tasks in order of importance.
This will help you focus on the more important jobs, and it will reveal which ones you can put off, delegate, or even eliminate.
For a week, keep track of how you use your time.
Then look for ways to make better use of it.
The more you are in control, the less pressured you will feel.
Schedule some downtime.
Even short breaks can reinvigorate you and reduce your stress.
A father and mother spending time together with their young son and daughter.
Get Support
"Anxiety in a man’s heart weighs it down, but a good word cheers it up. "​ PROVERBS 12:25.
Meaning: Kind, compassionate words from others can lift your spirits.
Talk things over with an understanding person.
A confidant may help you to see things differently or even to see a solution you overlooked.
And just unburdening yourself can make you feel better.
Ask for help.
Can you delegate a task or share the workload?
If a work associate stresses you, look for ways to improve the situation.
For example, could you kindly and tactfully tell the person how he or she makes you feel?
(Proverbs 17:27) If such measures fail, can you reduce the time you spend with the person?
Care for Your Spiritual Need
A businessman at his workplace praying.
"Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need. "​ MATTHEW 5:3.
Meaning: As humans, we need more than food, clothing, and shelter.
We have a spiritual need.
To be happy, we must be conscious of that need and attend to it.
Prayer can be a big help.
God invites you to "throw all your anxiety on him, because he cares for you. " (1 Peter 5:7) Prayer and wholesome meditation can result in deep inner peace.​ Philippians 4:6, 7.
Read spiritually uplifting things.
The principles discussed in this magazine come from the Bible, which was written to satisfy our spiritual need.
These also foster "practical wisdom and thinking ability. "
(Proverbs 3:21) Why not set a goal to read the Bible?
The book of Proverbs might be a good place to start.
THE POWER OF FORGIVENESS
"The insight of a man certainly slows down his anger, and it is beauty on his part to overlook an offense. "​ PROVERBS 19:11.
In the Journal of Health Psychology, Loren Toussaint states that "stress degrades [health] and forgiveness protects health. "
He adds: "Forgiveness is the release of negative​ and the potential enhancement of positive ​feelings, emotions, and behaviors toward an offender. "
He thus concludes that a forgiving spirit "may help minimize stress-related disorders. "
A Stress-Free Life Is Possible
The wisdom in the Bible can help us to avoid much needless stress.
We ourselves cannot eliminate all that stresses us.
But our Creator can.
He has even appointed someone to come to our aid.
That one is Jesus Christ.
On a global scale, he will soon do even more wonderful things than he did when he was a man on earth.
JESUS WILL HEAL THE SICK, AS HE DEMONSTRATED.
"They brought him all those who were suffering with various diseases . . . , and he cured them. "​ MATTHEW 4:24.
JESUS WILL PROVIDE HOUSING AND FOOD FOR ALL.
"They [Christ’s subjects] will build houses and live in them, and they will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage.
They will not build for someone else to inhabit, nor will they plant for others to eat. "​ ISAIAH 65:21, 22.
JESUS’ RULE WILL RESULT IN GLOBAL PEACE AND SECURITY.
"In his days the righteous will flourish, and peace will abound until the moon is no more.
He will have subjects from sea to sea and from the River to the ends of the earth. . . .
His enemies will lick the dust. "​ PSALM 72:7-9.
JESUS WILL ELIMINATE INJUSTICE.
"He will have pity on the lowly and the poor, and the lives of the poor he will save.
From oppression and from violence he will rescue them. "​ PSALM 72:13, 14.
JESUS WILL EVEN ELIMINATE SUFFERING AND DEATH.
"Death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. "​ REVELATION 21:4.
"PERILOUS TIMES OF GREAT STRESS "
"The world is more stressed, worried, sad and in pain today than we’ve ever seen it. "​ Mohamed S. Younis, Gallup managing editor.
Why is stress so common?
The Bible gives a most reasonable answer.
At 2 Timothy 3:1, it states: "In the last days will come . . . perilous times of great stress and trouble. "
(The Amplified Bible) The reason, the Bible goes on to say, relates to the bad personality traits of people.
These traits include greed, arrogance, religious hypocrisy, a violent disposition, a lack of family affection, and a lack of self-control.
(2 Timothy 3:2-5) The last days will end when Jesus Christ takes full control of the earth as King of God’s Kingdom, a heavenly government.​ Daniel 2:44.
"A Calm Heart Gives Life to the Body "
A husband and wife reading together on their electronic tablet.
Those words, found at Proverbs 14:30, were written about three thousand years ago!
They reflect the timeless wisdom found in the Bible.
If you would like to learn more, go to jw.org.
There you will find videos, animations, interviews, and articles on many helpful topics, including stress relief.
A sample is listed here:
FOR MARRIED COUPLES
Managing Conflicts in Marriage
How to Keep Peace With Your Relatives
How to Let Go of Resentment
FOR PARENTS
How to Communicate With Your Teenager
When Your Teenage Daughter Is Stressed Out
How to Teach Teens Internet Safety
FOR TEENS
Beat a Bully Without Using Your Fists
How Can I Get More Sleep?
Why Make Peace With My Siblings?
An Ancient Book for Modern Life
Many people respect the Bible for its religious significance.
However, the Bible offers more than religious guidance.
It has practical advice for everyday living.
Consider, for example, what some people say about how they have personally benefited from reading the Bible and applying its advice in their life.
"My life is more balanced.
My mental and emotional health has improved.
I have gained a more positive outlook. "​ Fiona.
"From studying the Bible, I have found real purpose and meaning in life. "​ Gnitko.
"My life has changed immeasurably for the better.
I now have a simple, family-oriented lifestyle. "​ Andrew.
These are not isolated experiences.
Many people around the world have found that the Bible has much practical guidance for everyday life.
Let us consider how the Bible can help people enhance their . . .
Physical health
Emotional health
Family life and friendships
Financial stability
Spirituality
The following material will show how the Bible truly is not only a sacred book but also one that can benefit you in tangible ways.
"The one who is slow to anger has great discernment, but the impatient one displays his foolishness. "​ PROVERBS 14:29.
AVOID OVEREATING.
"Do not be . . . among those who gorge themselves. "​ PROVERBS 23:20.
Family Life and Friendships
Many find it daunting to maintain strong personal relationships.
Consider some Bible principles that can help you improve your life socially.
BE UNSELFISH
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "Look out not only for your own interests, but also for the interests of others. "​ Philippians 2:4.
WHAT IT MEANS: Successful relationships are more about giving than about receiving.
If you follow a selfish course of life, you can damage your relationships with others.
For example, a selfish marriage mate may be disloyal to his or her partner.
Additionally, nobody wants to make friends with a person who always boasts about what he owns or knows.
Thus, as the book The Road to Character says, "self-centeredness leads in several unfortunate directions. "
Help others.
Strong friendships stem from a sense of commitment and trust.
Some studies indicate that people who help others suffer less from depression and boost their own self-esteem.
Show empathy.
Empathy has been described as feeling another person’s pain in your heart.
If you show empathy, you will be less likely to use biting sarcasm, that is, sharp and often ironic expressions intended to hurt the feelings of another person.
When you show empathy, you also become tolerant of others.
Thus, empathy can help you to avoid being prejudiced and also to make friends from different cultures or backgrounds.
Give of your time.
The more time you spend with others, the better you will get to know them.
You need to have meaningful conversations with others to make real friends.
So be a good listener.
Show interest in your friends’ concerns.
A recent study states that "deep conversations may actually make people happier. "
CHOOSE FRIENDSHIPS WISELY
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "Bad associations corrupt good morals. "​ 1 Corinthians 15:33, footnote.
WHAT IT MEANS: The people you spend time with have a great influence on you​ for good or for bad.
Sociologists agree that such influence can affect your life.
For example, they say that if you surround yourself with people who smoke or who are getting divorced, you may be more likely to start smoking or to want a divorce.
WHAT YOU CAN DO: Make friends with people who display qualities and have values you admire or want to imitate.
For instance, seek association with people who are tactful, respectful, generous, and hospitable.
A woman shows a little girl a Bible-based video
Watch Bible-based videos designed to help married couples, teenagers, and young children improve their family life
AVOID HURTFUL SPEECH.
"Thoughtless speech is like the stabs of a sword. "​ PROVERBS 12:18.
BE GENEROUS.
"The generous person will prosper. "​ PROVERBS 11:25.
TREAT OTHERS AS YOU WANT TO BE TREATED.
"All things . . . that you want men to do to you, you also must do to them. "​ MATTHEW 7:12.
Financial Stability
Many people have minimized their money problems by applying Bible principles.
HAVE A GOOD PLAN
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "The plans of the diligent surely lead to success, but all who are hasty surely head for poverty. "​ Proverbs 21:5.
WHAT IT MEANS: Diligently sticking to your plans is an important key to success.
Therefore, plan before spending.
Remember, you likely cannot buy everything you want.
Thus, spend your money wisely.
Stick to a budget.
Write down all your expenses, and put them in categories.
Then allocate funds for each expense.
If you overspend in one category, take money from another to cover the difference.
For example, if you spent more than you planned on automobile fuel, take money set aside for a less important purpose​ for example, dining out.
Avoid unnecessary debt.
To the extent possible, avoid going into debt.
Instead, save up to buy the items you need.
If you use a credit card, try to pay off your balance in full each month to avoid paying interest.
If you are in debt, set up a repayment plan, and then stick to it.
One study suggests that when paying with a credit card, people are prone to spend more.
So if you have a credit card, use it with restraint.
BEWARE OF HARMFUL ATTITUDES
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "The lazy one does not plow in winter, so he will be begging during the harvest when he has nothing. "​ Proverbs 20:4.
WHAT IT MEANS: Laziness can contribute to poverty.
Therefore, be a diligent worker, and to the extent possible, plan your financial future.
Work hard.
Protect your source of income by being industrious and dependable at your job.
Employers appreciate diligence.
Be honest.
Do not steal from your employer.
Dishonesty could mar your reputation and make it difficult for you to find employment later on.
Avoid greed.
An unbalanced approach to money can eventually damage your health and your relationships with others.
Remember, there is more to life than money.
A man reads the Bible online
Read the Bible online, available in hundreds of languages on jw.org
DO NOT WASTE TIME AND RESOURCES ON BAD HABITS.
"A drunkard and a glutton will come to poverty, and drowsiness will clothe one with rags. "​ PROVERBS 23:21.
AVOID UNDUE STRESS.
"Stop being anxious about your lives as to what you will eat or what you will drink, or about your bodies as to what you will wear. "​ MATTHEW 6:25.
AVOID ENVY.
"An envious man is eager for wealth, not knowing that poverty will overtake him. "​ PROVERBS 28:22.
As noted at the outset, many people consider the Bible to be a sacred book.
They find that when they read it and apply its guidance, they feel uplifted spiritually and come to understand their purpose in life.
The Bible uses the word "spirituality " to refer to an attitude or an approach to life.
(Jude 18, 19) Unlike a fleshly-minded person, who focuses more on self, those with a spiritual outlook value God’s standards.​ Ephesians 5:1.
HOPE
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "If you become discouraged in times of trouble, your strength will be meager. "​ Proverbs 24:10, footnote.
WHAT IT MEANS: Discouragement can sap us of the strength we need in order to deal with life’s problems.
On the other hand, hope can give us the courage to keep going.
It can be comforting to acknowledge that the problems we face may well be temporary; in fact, something good may come from them.
WHAT YOU CAN DO: Try to have an optimistic view of the future.
Instead of worrying about what might happen or waiting for the perfect set of circumstances, take action in harmony with your goals.
Granted, "unexpected events " can occur.
(Ecclesiastes 9:11) Realistically, though, things often turn out better than we may expect.
Thus, using an agricultural metaphor, the Bible says: "Sow your seed in the morning and do not let your hand rest until the evening; for you do not know which will have success, whether this one or that one, or whether they will both do well. "​ Ecclesiastes 11:6.
ANSWERS TO LIFE’S BIG QUESTIONS
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "Give me understanding . . .
Your word is truth. "​ Psalm 119:144, 160.
WHAT IT MEANS: The Bible provides answers to the questions that virtually everyone asks.
For example, it answers such questions as
Where did we come from?
Why are we here?
What happens when a person dies?
Is this life all there is?
Millions of people around the world have improved their lives by examining the Bible’s answers to those questions and more.
WHAT YOU CAN DO: Examine for yourself what the Bible teaches.
Ask any one of Jehovah’s Witnesses for help to understand the Bible.
Browse our website, jw.org, or attend one of our meetings, which are free and open to the public.
A woman watches the video Why Study the Bible? on jw.org
Watch the video Why Study the Bible? on jw.org.
It is available in over 880 languages
BE AWARE OF YOUR NEED FOR SPIRITUALITY.
LEARN MORE ABOUT THE GOD OF THE BIBLE.
"Seek God . . . and really find him . . .
He is not far off from each one of us. "​ ACTS 17:27.
READ AND REFLECT ON THE MESSAGE OF THE BIBLE.
"His delight is in the law of Jehovah, and he meditates on His law day and night. . . .
Everything he does will succeed. "​ PSALM 1:2, 3, footnote.
The Most Helpful Book in History
The Bible is by far the most widely translated and distributed book.
So its wisdom has reached and helped more people than any other publication.
Consider these statistics:
BIBLE TRANSLATION AND DISTRIBUTION
Stacks of Bibles
96.5% of the world’s population have access to the Bible
3,350 Languages AVAILABLE (IN WHOLE OR IN PART) 5,000,000,000 Estimated number of copies produced, far more than any other book in history
LEARN MORE
VISIT OUR WEBSITE, JW.ORG. THERE YOU CAN
Read the Bible online (available in hundreds of languages)
Download a copy
Get answers to Bible questions
Read articles about how the Bible has improved the lives of many people
Take an online Bible study course
Request a personal Bible study
JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES AND THE BIBLE
JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES ACTIVELY SHARE IN THE TRANSLATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF THE BIBLE.
These are some of the Bible translations that we have distributed over the years:
NEW WORLD TRANSLATION
A graph shows the growth in production of the New World Translation from 1950 until 2020
180 Languages AVAILABLE (IN WHOLE OR IN PART)
227 MILLION COPIES OF THE NEW WORLD TRANSLATION PRODUCED SINCE 1950
The Benefits of Self-Control
WHAT IS SELF-CONTROL?
Self-control includes the ability to
delay gratification
restrain impulses
complete unpleasant tasks
put others before self
WHY IS SELF-CONTROL IMPORTANT?
Children who have greater self-control can resist temptation, even if the temptation promises short-term rewards.
In contrast, children with less self-control may be more likely to
be aggressive
suffer depression
smoke or abuse alcohol or drugs
make poor choices in what they eat
One study found that children with greater self-control were less likely, as adults, to have health issues, financial stress, and problems with the law.
That study led Professor Angela Duckworth of the University of Pennsylvania to conclude: "There may be no such thing as ‘too much’ self-control. "
HOW TO TEACH SELF-CONTROL
Learn to say no and mean it.
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "Let your word ‘Yes’ mean yes, your ‘No,’ no. "​ Matthew 5:37.
Young children might test a parent’s resolve by throwing a tantrum​ perhaps even in public.
If the parent gives in, the child learns that tantrums are an effective way to get a no changed to a yes.
On the other hand, if the parent says no and means it, the child learns a basic fact of life​ that we cannot always get what we want.
"Ironically, people who learn that lesson seem to be the most fulfilled, " writes Dr. David Walsh.
"We’re not doing our kids any favors when we teach them that the world will always serve up whatever they want on a silver platter. "
Saying no to your child now will help him to say no to himself later in life​ for example, if he is tempted to take drugs, have premarital sex, or engage in other harmful practices.
Help your children to understand consequences, both good and bad.
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "Whatever a person is sowing, this he will also reap. "​ Galatians 6:7.
Your child needs to understand that actions have consequences and that a lack of self-control will therefore have undesirable results.
For example, if your son typically loses his temper when he gets upset, others may tend to avoid him.
On the other hand, if he develops the ability to restrain himself when provoked​ or to wait patiently rather than interrupt ​people will be drawn to him.
Help your child understand that he is more likely to have good outcomes when he practices self-restraint.
Teach your child to prioritize.
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "Make sure of the more important things. "​ Philippians 1:10.
Self-control is not just a matter of holding back from doing wrong; it includes doing what is necessary, even when this is not particularly exciting or fun.
It is important for your child to learn how to establish priorities and stick to them.
Have your child do the important things first.
For example, he should put homework before recreation.
Be a good role model.
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "I set the pattern for you, that just as I did to you, you should also do. "​ John 13:15.
Your child will see how you respond to unpleasant or frustrating situations.
Demonstrate by your example that self-control leads to better outcomes.
For example, when your child tests your patience, do you react with anger or do you remain calm?
A mother says no as her little boy tries to pick out candy in a store
TRAIN NOW
Saying no to your child now will help him to say no to himself later in life​ for example, if he is tempted to take drugs or to engage in other harmful practices
Teach by Example
Does my child see me work through frustrating situations without losing my temper?
Have I explained to my child the reasons why I try to handle problems calmly?
How would my child describe me​ as impulsive and quick-tempered or as self-disciplined and controlled?
What We Did . . .
"Even though our daughter was allowed to become frustrated or angry, she wasn’t allowed to let those feelings exasperate those around her.
If she couldn’t control herself, then she would be removed from others’ company until she could calm down. "​ Theresa.
"My wife and I made it our aim to let our children know when they made us proud.
We praised them when they didn’t allow difficulty to get them out of sorts or when they kept their cool and showed self-control. "​ Wayne.
How to Be Humble
WHAT IS HUMILITY?
Humble people are respectful.
They do not behave arrogantly, nor do they expect others to treat them as special.
Rather, a person with humility takes genuine interest in others and is willing to learn from them.
Sometimes humility is misjudged as a weakness.
In reality, it is a strength that helps people recognize their faults and acknowledge their limitations.
WHY IS HUMILITY IMPORTANT?
Humility benefits relationships.
"Overall, humble people are more connected to others, " says the book The Narcissism Epidemic.
It adds that such people find it "easier to relate to other people and the wider world. "
Humility benefits your child’s future.
Learning to be humble will help your child both now and later in life​ for example, when seeking employment.
"The young person with bloated self-esteem, unaware of her own deficiencies, is unlikely to do well in the job interview, " writes Dr. Leonard Sax.
"But the young person who is genuinely interested in what the recruiter has to say is more likely to get the job. "
HOW TO TEACH HUMILITY
Encourage a balanced view of self.
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "If anyone thinks he is something when he is nothing, he is deceiving himself. "​ Galatians 6:3.
Avoid misleading maxims.
Sayings like "All your dreams can come true " and "You can be anything that you want to be " might sound inspiring, but they often do not prove true in real life.
Your children will likely be more successful if they have reasonable goals and work hard to achieve them.
Praise specific actions.
Simply telling a child that he or she is "awesome " does not encourage humility.
Be specific.
Limit your child’s use of social media.
Often, social media is linked with self-promotion​ broadcasting a person’s talents and accomplishments ​the very opposite of humility.
Encourage your child to apologize quickly.
Help your child to see where he is wrong and to acknowledge it.
Promote gratitude.
Gratitude for creation.
Children should appreciate nature and how much we depend on it for survival.
We need air to breathe, water to drink, and food to eat.
Use these examples to instill appreciation, awe, and gratitude for the wonders of the natural world.
Gratitude for people.
Remind your child that everyone is superior to him in one way or another and that instead of being jealous of others’ skills and abilities, he can learn from them.
Expressing gratitude.
Teach your children to say "thank you, " not just with words but with genuine appreciation.
A grateful spirit has been called a building block of humility.
Teach your children that there is value in serving others.
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "With humility consider others superior to you, as you look out not only for your own interests, but also for the interests of others. "​ Philippians 2:3, 4.
Expect your child to do chores.
Exempting your child from family chores might give him the message, ‘You are too important to do this!’
Family duties should come first, and playing second.
Point out how chores benefit others and how others will appreciate and respect him for doing them.
Emphasize that serving others is a privilege.
Doing so is a primary way to develop maturity.
Therefore, encourage your child to identify those in need.
Discuss with him what he can do to help them.
Commend and support your child as he serves others.
A boy puts trash in a bin
A child who learns to perform humble tasks at home is more likely to work well with others as an adult
Do I let my children know that at times I also need help from others?
Do I speak positively and appreciatively about others, or do I belittle them?
Do my children see that I value serving others?
"Our daughter told us about a classmate who, she said, is mean to others and is not liked.
I told her to think of what that girl might be going through at home.
After all, not everybody has a good family life.
That helped our daughter to see that she is not better than others.
She may just have better circumstances. "​ Karen.
"We encourage our daughters to enjoy what they learn in school and simply to do their best without comparing themselves to others.
We want them to know that we will not compare them to others either. "​ Marianna.
How to Be Resilient
WHAT IS RESILIENCE?
A resilient person bounces back from obstacles and disappointments.
This skill is acquired through experience.
Just as a child cannot learn how to walk without an occasional fall, he cannot learn how to succeed in life without experiencing occasional setbacks.
WHY IS RESILIENCE IMPORTANT?
Some children get discouraged when they meet with failure, adversity, or criticism.
Others give up entirely.
However, they need to understand the following facts:
Failure is inevitable in some endeavors.​ James 3:2.
Adversity affects everyone at some point.​ Ecclesiastes 9:11.
Correction is vital for learning.​ Proverbs 9:9.
Resilience will help your child face life’s challenges with confidence.
HOW TO TEACH RESILIENCE
When your child fails.
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "The righteous one may fall seven times, and he will get up again. "​ Proverbs 24:16.
Help your child put things in perspective.
For example, what would he do if he failed a test at school?
He might give up, saying, "I can’t do anything right! "
To teach resilience, help your child work out a strategy that will help him to improve.
In this way, he will take charge of the problem rather than become a victim of it.
At the same time, avoid fixing the problem for your child.
Instead, help him create his own plan.
You might ask him, "What can you do to improve your understanding of the subject that is being taught? "
When adversity strikes.
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "You do not know what your life will be like tomorrow. "​ James 4:14.
Life is unpredictable.
A person who is rich today might be poor tomorrow; a person who is healthy today might be sick tomorrow.
"The swift do not always win the race, nor do the mighty win the battle, " says the Bible, "because time and unexpected events overtake them all. "​ Ecclesiastes 9:11.
As a parent, you rightly take reasonable steps to protect your child from danger.
Realistically, though, it is not possible to shield your child from all of life’s adversities.
Of course, your child may not be old enough to experience the loss of a job or a financial reversal.
Still, you can help him cope with other adversities​ for example, the loss of a friendship or the death of a family member.
When your child receives constructive criticism.
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "Listen to counsel . . . in order to become wise in your future. "​ Proverbs 19:20.
Constructive criticism is not bullying; it is guidance that addresses an action or an attitude that needs to change.
When you teach your child to accept correction, both of you are spared much grief.
"If children are always rescued from their errors, " says a father named John, "they will never learn.
They will jump from one problem to the next, and you will spend your life following them, stomping out the fires that they cause.
That makes life miserable for the parents and the child. "
How can you help your child benefit from constructive criticism?
When your child receives it​ whether at school or anywhere else ​resist the urge to say that the correction is unfair.
Instead, you could ask:
"Why do you think the correction was given? "
"How can you improve? "
"What will you do the next time you are in this situation? "
Remember, constructive criticism will serve your child well, not only now but also in adulthood.
A mother helps her daughter who is frustrated because a cake she baked turned out poorly
A child who is able to bounce back from disappointments and mistakes is more likely to persevere when learning skills and to become proficient at them
Do I admit my mistakes, or do I blame others?
Do I talk about my failures and what I learned from them?
Do I ridicule others for their mistakes?
"We did not protect our children from every challenge, failure, or mistake.
When I was young, enduring those things made me a better person.
I feel that both of our children grew up to be balanced, well-adjusted adults because they were not pampered. "​ Jeff.
"When my wife and I made mistakes with our children, we would always apologize.
I believe that parents should share their own mistakes, setbacks, and errors with their children to emphasize that it’s just part of life. "​ James.
How to Be Responsible
WHAT DOES BEING RESPONSIBLE INVOLVE?
People who are responsible are reliable.
They follow through on assigned tasks and complete them on time.
Even with their limited capabilities, very young children can start learning to be responsible.
"A child’s capacity to cooperate begins by fifteen months, and his desire to start willingly pitching in starts at around eighteen months, " says the book Parenting Without Borders.
"In many cultures parents begin to hone their children’s helpfulness especially between the ages of five and seven, and children this young competently assist in many domestic tasks. "
WHY IS BEING RESPONSIBLE IMPORTANT?
The term "boomerang generation " describes young adults who leave home and try to live on their own but fall on hard times and return to Mom and Dad.
In some cases, this happens because the youth has never been taught to manage money, run a household, or live up to daily responsibilities.
Therefore, it is best if you train your children for the responsibilities of adulthood.
"You don’t want to keep them dependent upon you until they turn eighteen and then dump them out into the real world, " says the book How to Raise an Adult.
HOW TO TEACH RESPONSIBILITY
Assign chores.
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "There is benefit in every kind of hard work. "​ Proverbs 14:23.
Young children are eager to work alongside their parents.
You can take advantage of this natural inclination by assigning your children chores around the home.
Some parents are reluctant to do that.
They reason that their school-age children face a mountain of homework each day, so why add to their burden?
However, children who do chores are more likely to succeed at school, since chores teach them to accept assignments and complete tasks.
Besides, notes the book Parenting Without Borders, "when we ignore our children’s eagerness to participate when they are younger, they internalize the idea that contributing is unimportant . . .
They also begin to expect that things will be done for them. "
As that quote indicates, doing chores trains children to be contributors rather than consumers, givers rather than takers.
Chores help children realize that they have a valued place in the family​ and a responsibility toward it.
Help your children take responsibility for their mistakes.
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "Listen to counsel and accept discipline, in order to become wise in your future. "​ Proverbs 19:20.
When your children make mistakes​ for example, if your son or daughter accidentally damages another person’s property ​resist the urge to cover up what happened.
Children can accept the consequences​ in this case, apologizing and perhaps even making restitution.
Owning up to mistakes and failures will teach your children
to be honest and admit their errors
to avoid blaming others
to avoid making excuses
to apologize, when appropriate
A father helps his son to water a plant
Children who are taught to be responsible will be able to manage their life more effectively as adults
Am I industrious, organized, and punctual?
Do my children see me working around the home?
Do I acknowledge my mistakes, even apologizing when necessary?
"If I was making dinner, the children helped from a very young age.
If I was folding laundry, they folded some too.
If I was dusting, they dusted.
Work became fun for them.
They were happy just to be with me, doing what I was doing.
That’s how they learned to be responsible. "​ Laura.
"Once, I had our young son call a family friend and tell her he was sorry for being rude.
Over the years he’s had to apologize on numerous occasions for saying honest but unkind things, but now he has learned to apologize freely when he makes a mistake. "​ Debra.
THE BENEFITS OF CONSEQUENCES
"Children make mistakes, and when they do, it’s vital that parents remember that the educational benefits of consequences are a gift, " writes educator Jessica Lahey in the Atlantic magazine.
"Year after year, my ‘best’ students​ the ones who are happiest and successful in their lives ​are the students who were allowed to fail, held responsible for missteps, and challenged to be the best people they could be in the face of their mistakes. "
The Value of Adult Guidance
WHAT DOES ADULT GUIDANCE INVOLVE?
Children need adults in their life who can provide leadership and advice.
As a parent, you are in the best position to fulfill that role; in fact, it is your duty.
However, other adults can be mentors to your children as well.
WHY IS ADULT GUIDANCE IMPORTANT?
In many lands, young people have little interaction with adults.
Consider this:
Children spend much of their day at school, where students outnumber teachers and other adults.
After school, some youths return to a home that is empty because both parents have to work.
One study found that in the United States, children between 8 and 12 years of age spend an average of about six hours on entertainment media each day.
The book Hold On to Your Kids says: "Young people are turning for instruction, modeling, and guidance not to mothers, fathers, teachers, and other responsible adults but to . . . their own peers. "
HOW TO PROVIDE GUIDANCE
Spend time with your children.
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "Train a child in the way he should go; even when he grows old he will not depart from it. "​ Proverbs 22:6, footnote.
Children naturally look to their parents for guidance.
In fact, experts say that even as children enter the teen years, they tend to value the advice of their parents over that of their peers.
"Parents remain the major influence on their child’s attitudes and behavior through adolescence and into young adulthood, " writes Dr. Laurence Steinberg in the book You and Your Adolescent.
He adds: "Adolescents care what you think and listen to what you say, even if they don’t always admit it or agree with every point. "
Take advantage of your children’s natural inclination to look up to you.
Spend time with your children and share your viewpoints, values, and experiences with them.
Provide a mentor.
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "The one walking with the wise will become wise. "​ Proverbs 13:20.
Can you think of an adult who might be a good role model for your adolescent?
Why not arrange for that person to spend time with him or her?
Of course, you should not abdicate your parental authority.
But the encouragement from a trusted adult who you know will not harm your child can supplement the training you provide.
In the Bible, Timothy​ even as an adult ​benefited greatly from the association he had with the apostle Paul, and Paul benefited from Timothy’s companionship.​ Philippians 2:20, 22.
During the past century, many families have become somewhat fragmented, as grandparents, uncles, aunts, and other relatives may live in another part of the world.
If that is true in your case, try to provide your teens with opportunities to learn from adults who have traits that you would like to see in your children.
A woman shows a girl her old photos
A child who looks to adults for guidance is more likely to display wisdom and maturity later in life
Am I a good role model for my children?
Do I show my children that I too look up to those with greater experience as mentors?
Do I demonstrate that my children are important to me by spending time with them?
"Sometimes when I am in the middle of something, my daughter will say she wants to talk.
I always make sure that she is a priority, even if I have to tell her to wait a few minutes so that she can have my undivided attention.
My wife and I also strive to set a good example so she will see that we live by the same principles we are teaching her. "​ David.
"When our daughter was born, my husband and I decided that I would not work but would stay home to help raise her.
I do not regret that decision.
It is very important to do as much as possible to be present in a child’s life so that he or she will have proper guidance and direction.
More important, being there shows your child that you care. "​ Lisa.
SPENDING TIME WITH ADULTS
"My children have grown up around a diverse group of adults, and this has helped them to see life through other people’s experiences.
For example, they were amazed when my grandmother told them that when she was a little girl, her family was the first one to get an electric light.
She told them that people from surrounding areas came to their house just to stand in the kitchen and watch the light being turned on and off.
That story made my children see how different life used to be.
Learning about their great-grandmother in this way also helped them to have respect for her and for other older ones.
When children spend more time with adults​ and less with their peers ​they are able to see life from a different perspective. "​ Maranda.
The Need for Moral Values
WHAT ARE MORAL VALUES?
People with moral values have a clear sense of right and wrong.
Their moral code is not based on how they feel at the moment.
Rather, it is founded on a firm set of principles that act as a guide for conduct​ even when others are not watching.
WHY ARE MORAL VALUES IMPORTANT?
Children are bombarded with distorted messages about morals, whether from the people they go to school with, the music they listen to, or the movies and TV shows they watch.
Such influences can challenge their beliefs about what is right and what is wrong.
That is especially true during the teen years.
By that time, says the book Beyond the Big Talk, they "need to understand the intense peer and media pressures to be popular and accepted, and they need to learn to make decisions consistent with their own values and choices, even if that means going against their friends. "
Clearly, training needs to begin before adolescence.
HOW TO TEACH MORAL VALUES
Establish a moral code.
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "Mature people . . . have their powers of discernment trained to distinguish both right and wrong. "​ Hebrews 5:14.
Build a moral vocabulary.
Point to everyday situations and highlight contrasts: "This is honest; that is dishonest. "
"This is loyal; that is disloyal. "
"This is kind; that is unkind. "
In time, your child will connect moral values with actions.
Explain the reasons for your moral code.
For example, ask questions such as: Why is honesty the best policy?
How can lying damage friendships?
Why is stealing wrong?
Appeal to your child’s developing conscience and sense of logic.
Emphasize the benefits of adhering to good morals.
You could say: "If you are honest, others will trust you " or "If you are kind, people will like being around you. "
Make your moral code part of your family identity.
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "Keep proving what you yourselves are. "​ 2 Corinthians 13:5.
Your moral code should be part of your family, so that you can truthfully say:
"In our family we do not lie. "
"We do not hit others or scream at them. "
"We do not approve of abusive speech. "
Your child will see that moral values are not mere rules to follow but that they make up the family’s identity.
Frequently discuss your family values with your child.
Use everyday situations as object lessons.
You could compare your values with those presented in the media or in school.
Ask your child questions like: "What would you have done? "
"How would our family have handled this? "
Reinforce moral values.
BIBLE PRINCIPLE: "Maintain a good conscience. "​ 1 Peter 3:16.
Commend good behavior.
If your child displays good moral values in what he does, praise him for it and explain why.
For example, you could say: "You were honest.
I am proud of you. "
If your child confesses to having done something wrong, sincerely commend him for his honesty before you correct him.
Correct bad behavior.
Help your children accept responsibility for their actions.
Children should know what they did wrong and how their conduct deviates from the family’s value system.
Some parents are reluctant to make their child ‘feel bad’ about misbehavior, but discussing bad behavior with your child this way will help him develop a conscience that is sensitive to right and wrong.
A girl observes her mother offering to return a woman’s lost wallet
Children who see their parents display honesty are more likely to resist temptations to be dishonest when on their own
Do my children see in my actions and words that I live by the values that our family has adopted?
Do my spouse and I promote the same values?
Do I justify ignoring my moral code by saying or thinking, "This is OK for adults "?
"We used the experiences of others to show the benefits of good morals and compared the results they had with those of people who made unwise decisions.
When our children told us about a peer who made a poor choice, we discussed it with them so that they would not go down the same path. "​ Nicole.
"When our daughter was very young, we would tell her that she had two choices​ one good and the other bad ​and we outlined the consequences of each.
From this, she learned to make decisions.
It was a vital lesson, since life is all about choices, no matter how old we are. "​ Yolanda.
More Help for Parents
A woman reads the Bible
As you might have noticed, the advice found in this magazine is based on the Bible.
The Bible contains the best guidance for sound living for each member of the family.
Its principles can improve a person’s thinking ability and sound judgment.​ Proverbs 1:1-4.
THE BIBLE ALSO ANSWERS LIFE’S BIG QUESTIONS, SUCH AS:
What is the meaning of life?
Is God to blame for our suffering?
What happens when we die?
We invite you to investigate the Bible for yourself to find the answers to these questions and more.
Watch the video Why Study the Bible?
Visit jw.org.
Threats to Our Safety and Security
"This generation enjoys unprecedented technological, scientific and financial resources . . .
And yet this is perhaps the first generation to take the world to the brink of a [political, economic, and environmental] systems breakdown. "​ The Global Risks Report 2018, World Economic Forum.
WHY ARE MANY INFORMED PEOPLE CONCERNED ABOUT OUR FUTURE AND THAT OF THE EARTH?
CONSIDER JUST SOME OF THE CHALLENGES FACING US.
A locked computer
CYBERCRIME: "Increasingly the internet is proving to be a dangerous place to visit.
It is a haven for pedophiles, bullies, trolls and hackers, " says the newspaper The Australian.
"Identity theft is one of the fastest-growing crimes in the world. . . .
The internet provides another outlet for one of the worst traits of humankind​ the capacity to be vicious and cruel. "
Many hands reach for money
FINANCIAL INEQUALITY: According to a recent Oxfam International report, the eight richest people own the same amount of wealth as the poorer half of humanity.
"Our broken economies, " said Oxfam, "are funnelling wealth to a rich elite at the expense of the poorest in society, the majority of whom are women. "
Some fear that the growing inequality might trigger social unrest.
Bombs
CONFLICT AND PERSECUTION: A 2018 United Nations Refugee Agency report said: "We are now witnessing the highest levels of displacement on record. "
More than 68 million people have had to leave their homes, largely because of conflict or persecution.
"Nearly 1 person is forcibly displaced every two seconds, " said the report.
Pollution comes out of a smokestack
THREATS TO THE ENVIRONMENT: "Biodiversity is being lost at mass-extinction rates, " states The Global Risks Report 2018, and "pollution of the air and sea has become an increasingly pressing threat to human health. "
Also, insect numbers are in steep decline in some lands.
Because insects pollinate plants, scientists are now warning of a potential "ecological Armageddon. "
Coral reefs are in trouble too.
Scientists estimate that about half the world’s reefs have died in the past 30 years.
Are we able to make the changes needed for a safer and more secure world?
Some feel that education should be part of the answer.
If so, what kind of education?
The following articles will consider these questions.
Getting to the Root of Our Problems
Do you believe that mankind can solve the many problems that rob us of peace and security and that threaten our future?
To be effective, any cure must surely address the root causes of our troubles, not just the symptoms.
To illustrate, a patient named Tom was sick and later died.
Why did he die?
"When his first symptoms appeared, no one thought to search for their underlying cause, " wrote the doctor whose hospital received Tom shortly before he died.
It seems that Tom’s earlier caregivers had simply given him medication to make him feel better.
Are humans taking a similar approach to the world’s ills?
For example, in fighting crime, governments enact laws, install video surveillance, and strengthen police forces.
But these measures, while effective to some extent, do not address underlying causes.
After all, behavior usually reflects attitudes, beliefs, and desires.
Daniel, who lives in a South American country that has a failing economy, says: "We once had normal lives.
We did not dread armed robbery.
But now there no longer exists a peaceful town or village.
The failing economy has revealed what many people are really like​ greedy and lacking in respect for the life or property of others. "
A man whom we will call Elias fled from a conflict in the Middle East and later studied the Bible.
He states: "Many young men from my home city were encouraged by their families and the political-religious system to get involved in the war and be considered heroes.
Those on the opposing side were told the very same thing!
All of this made me see how sad it is to put faith in human rulers. "
An ancient book of wisdom rightly states:
"The inclination of the heart of man is bad from his youth up. "​ Genesis 8:21.
"The heart is more treacherous than anything else and is desperate.
Who can know it? "​ Jeremiah 17:9.
"Out of the heart come wicked reasonings, murders, . . . sexual immorality, thefts, false testimonies. "​ Matthew 15:19.
Mankind has been unable to find a cure for the hurtful traits that lurk within us.
In fact, those traits appear to be getting worse, as reflected in the problems mentioned in the preceding article.
(2 Timothy 3:1-5) And this is so despite the vast amount of information that is available today, not to mention our unprecedented ability to communicate with others!
So why can we not make the world peaceful and safe?
Are we asking more of ourselves than we can give?
Are we trying to do the impossible?
ARE WE ATTEMPTING THE IMPOSSIBLE?
Even if by some miracle we could cure mankind’s hurtful traits, we would still be unable to make the world safe and secure for all.
Our human limitations.
The simple truth is this: "It does not belong to man . . . even to direct his step. "
(Jeremiah 10:23) Yes, we were not created to govern ourselves.
In fact, we were no more created to rule over our fellow humans than we were created to live under water or in outer space!
Two people snorkeling
We were no more created to rule over our fellow humans than we were created to live under water
Consider this: Do people in general like to have their equals tell them how to live or which moral values to live by?
Do people like others to dictate how they should view such things as abortion or capital punishment or how they should discipline their children?
These are just some of the issues that divide people.
So, humbling though it might be, what the Bible says makes sense.
We simply do not have the ability or the moral authority to rule over our fellow humans.
Where, then, can we turn for help?
The most reasonable answer is for us to turn to our Creator.
After all, he made us!
And contrary to what some may think, he has not forgotten us.
In fact, his concern for us is revealed in the wisdom found in the Bible.
When we understand that unique book, we also understand ourselves better.
And we can make sense of mankind’s sad history.
We can see why, as a German philosopher once wrote, "peoples and governments never have learned anything from history, or acted on principles deduced from it. "
BIBLE WISDOM PROTECTS US!
A wise man once said that "wisdom is proved righteous by all its children, " or results.
(Luke 7:35) An example of that wisdom is found at Isaiah 2:22, which says: "For your own sakes, quit trusting in mere man. "
That sound advice can protect us from false hopes and unrealistic expectations.
Kenneth, who lives in a North American city plagued with violence, says: "One politician after another promises to make things better, but they cannot.
Their failures are a regular reminder of Bible wisdom. "
Daniel, quoted earlier, writes: "Every day convinces me more that humans cannot govern well. . . .
Trusting in your bank account or in some pension scheme is no guarantee of a good retirement.
I have seen people suffer terrible frustration in this regard. "
The Bible does even more than protect us from unrealistic expectations.
It also gives us hope, as we will go on to see.
KEY POINT
THE WISDOM IN THE BIBLE HELPS US TO MAKE SENSE OF MANKIND’S FAILURES AND TRAGIC HISTORY
Moral Education
While on a school trip, some teenage boys were accused of sexually assaulting another male student.
All attended a prestigious private school in Canada.
After the incident, Leonard Stern wrote in the Ottawa Citizen newspaper: "All the advantages of intellect and education and social class do not inoculate young people against making bad moral decisions. "
Stern also stated: "You’d think the single greatest goal of parenting would be the promotion of a child’s moral development.
The reality is that many parents seem more concerned about academic or material advancement. "
To be sure, schooling is important.
But even the best secular education cannot help a person to combat wrong desires or bad inclinations.
Where, then, can we get an education that addresses those areas​ that provides moral guidance?
EDUCATION THAT PROVIDES MORAL AND SPIRITUAL GUIDANCE
The Bible is like a mirror.
When we look into it, we see our limitations and weaknesses more clearly.
(James 1:23-25) But the Bible does even more.
It helps us to make needed changes, to develop qualities that foster true peace and harmony.
Those qualities include goodness, kindness, patience, self-control, and love.
Love is even called "a perfect bond of union. "
(Colossians 3:14) Why is love so special?
Note what the Bible says about this quality.
"Love is patient and kind.
Love is not jealous.
It does not brag, does not get puffed up [with pride], does not behave indecently, does not look for its own interests, does not become provoked.
It does not keep account of the injury.
It does not rejoice over unrighteousness [badness], but rejoices with the truth.
It bears all things, . . . endures all things.
Love never fails. "​ 1 Corinthians 13:4-8.
"Love does not work evil to one’s neighbor. "​ Romans 13:10.
"Above all things, have intense love for one another, because love covers a multitude of sins. "​ 1 Peter 4:8.
When you are with people who love you, how do you feel?
Safe? Secure?
Relaxed?
Yes, you know that they want the best for you, that they would never intentionally hurt you.
Love can also move people to make sacrifices, even lifestyle changes, for the benefit of others.
For example, when a man we will call George became a grandfather, he dearly wanted to spend time with his grandson.
But there was a problem.
George smoked heavily, and his son-in-law did not want him smoking around the baby.
What did George do?
Even though he had smoked for 50 years, he gave up the habit for the sake of his grandson.
Yes, what power love has!
The Bible helps us to cultivate many fine qualities, such as goodness, kindness, and especially love
Love is a quality that we learn.
Parents play a big role in teaching their children how to love.
They feed and protect their children and come to their aid when they are hurt or sick.
Good parents talk with their children and teach them.
They also discipline their children, which includes teaching them sound principles of right and wrong.
Additionally, good parents set a fine example, becoming role models for their children.
Sadly, though, some parents fail in their responsibilities.
Does this mean that their children are doomed to failure?
Not at all!
Even many older people, including some who grew up in dysfunctional families, have made amazing changes in their lives, becoming caring and trustworthy citizens.
As we will see in the following article, that even includes some who may have been viewed by others as beyond reform!
KEY POINT
THE BIBLE CAN PROVIDE WHAT SECULAR EDUCATION CANNOT​ TRUSTWORTHY MORAL AND SPIRITUAL GUIDANCE
NOT EVERYONE WILL CHANGE
The Bible frankly acknowledges that some people will simply refuse to change for the better.
The wicked will continue to "act wickedly, " says Daniel 12:10.
Does that reality doom our prospects for lasting peace and safety?
If the future were just in human hands, our prospects would be grim indeed.
But as we will see, that is not the case.
In fact, the opposite is true​ our future can be very bright!
The Stories of Ricardo and Andres
Education based on the Bible has amazing power to improve lives.
Consider two examples of this: Ricardo and Andres.
RICARDO: At the impressionable age of 15, I joined a gang.
My new friends had a big influence on me.
In fact, it became my goal to spend ten years in prison!
That may sound foolish.
But in my neighborhood, those who had spent time in prison were admired and respected.
And I wanted to be like them.
Ricardo uses a gun and smokes in the past; Ricardo as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses
I experienced all that is associated with gang life, including drugs, sex, and violence.
One night I was involved in a shoot-out.
I thought I was going to be killed, but I escaped unharmed.
After that, I began to think more seriously about my life and my goals, and I decided that I wanted to change.
But how? Where could I find help?
Most of my relatives were unhappy.
Their lives were full of problems.
But that was not the case with the family of one of my uncles.
I knew that they were good people, and I knew that they lived by Bible principles.
In fact, I had once learned from them that God’s name is Jehovah.
So not long after the shoot-out, I prayed to Jehovah, addressing him by name and asking him to help me.
To my astonishment, the very next day, one of Jehovah’s Witnesses knocked on my door!
He became my Bible teacher.
I soon faced a big challenge.
My old friends often phoned, asking me to hang out with them.
Though it was not easy, I said no.
I was determined to continue my Bible study, and I am glad that I did!
My life improved dramatically, and I found true happiness.
I remember telling God in prayer that I had once been willing to spend ten years in prison to earn respect as a gang member.
So I asked him to allow me to serve him for at least ten years as a full-time minister in order to help others just as I had been helped.
God answered my prayer, for I have spent 17 years as a full-time minister!
And I might add, I never went to prison.
Many of my former friends, however, are serving long prison sentences.
Others are dead.
Looking back, I am most grateful to my Witness relatives.
They were willing to be different, to live by the Bible.
I grew to respect them more than I ever respected anyone in the gang.
Above all, I am thankful to God for teaching me the very best way to live.
ANDRES: I was born and raised in a poor neighborhood where drugs, extortion, murder, and prostitution were common.
My father was an alcoholic and a cocaine addict.
He and my mother were always fighting, verbally and physically.
Andres steals and overdrinks in the past; Andres as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses
At an early age, I began drinking alcohol and using drugs.
I spent most of my time on the streets, stealing and then selling what I stole.
As I got older, my father, in a misguided attempt to draw close to me, taught me how to smuggle drugs and other illegal products into the country and sell them.
I made a lot of money​ fast.
Then one day the police came to my home.
They arrested me, and I was sentenced to five years in prison for attempted murder.
One morning an announcement over the prison loudspeaker invited inmates to a Bible discussion held by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
I decided to attend.
What I heard made sense, so I began to study the Bible with the Witnesses.
They did not water down the Scriptures but showed me God’s high moral standards.
I soon realized that I could not make the needed changes without help, especially when I received threats from fellow inmates who did not like what I was doing.
So I prayed for strength and wisdom, and Jehovah helped me.
In fact, I was even able to go on the offensive, as it were, by speaking to other prisoners about the Bible.
When my release came, I was so nervous that I actually wanted to stay in prison longer!
As I was leaving, a number of inmates waved goodbye.
Some even said affectionately, "Go home, little shepherd. "
It scares me to think about how my life might have turned out had I not allowed God to educate me.
I am very, very thankful that God loves me and did not consider me a lost cause.
WHEN A PERSON IS HUMBLE AND HONEST, RECOGNIZES THAT HE HAS TO MAKE CHANGES, AND WANTS TO DO SO, THE BIBLE CAN HELP HIM.
IT HAS AN EXCELLENT TRACK RECORD
"Of . . .
Peace There Shall Be No End "
The United Nations is promoting the concept of "global citizenship. "
Goals include encouraging international cooperation, respecting human rights, and protecting our planet.
The reason?
As expressed by Maher Nasser in the UN Chronicle, "climate change, organized crime, rising inequalities, unresolved conflicts, mass displacement of people, global terrorism, infectious diseases, and similar threats do not recognize . . . borders. "
Others have gone even further, advocating a world government.
They include the Italian philosopher, poet, and statesman Dante (1265-1321) and the physicist Albert Einstein (1879-1955).
Dante believed that peace could not last in a politically divided world.
A "kingdom divided against itself comes to ruin, " he said, quoting Jesus Christ.​ Luke 11:17.
Shortly after World War II, which saw the use of two atomic bombs, Albert Einstein wrote an open letter to the General Assembly of the United Nations.
"The United Nations, " he said, "must act with utmost speed to create the necessary conditions for international security by laying the foundations for a real world government. "
But could the politicians who would make up such a powerful government be immune to corruption, incompetence, and oppression?
Or would they be just as prone to those dark traits as others have been?
These questions call to mind the words of British historian Lord Acton, who said: "Power tends to corrupt and absolute power corrupts absolutely. "
Even so, if the human family is to enjoy true peace and harmony, we have to be united.
But how can that goal be achieved?
Is it even realistic? The Bible’s answer is yes.
It can and will be achieved. How?
Not by a world government made up of corruptible politicians.
Rather, it will be by a government of God’s making.
What is more, that government will express his right to rule over his creation.
What is that government?
The Bible even gives it a name​ "the Kingdom of God, " or God’s Kingdom.​ Luke 4:43.
"LET YOUR KINGDOM COME "
Jesus Christ had God’s Kingdom in mind when he said in his model prayer: "Let your Kingdom come.
Let your will take place . . . on earth. "
(Matthew 6:9, 10) Yes, God’s Kingdom will ensure that God’s will is done on earth, not the will of power-hungry or selfish humans.
God’s Kingdom is also called "the Kingdom of the heavens. "
(Matthew 5:3) The reason?
While it will rule over the earth, it will not rule from the earth but will rule from heaven.
Think what that means.
This world government will not require material or financial support.
What a relief that will be for its human subjects!
As the term "kingdom " suggests, God’s Kingdom is a royal government.
It has a King​ Jesus Christ ​who received his authority from God.
Concerning Jesus, the Bible says:
"The government shall be upon his shoulder . . .
Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end. "​ Isaiah 9:6, 7, King James Version.
"To him there were given rulership, honor, and a kingdom, that the peoples, nations, and language groups should all serve him.
His rulership . . . will not pass away. "​ Daniel 7:14.
"The kingdom of the world has become the Kingdom of our Lord [God] and of his Christ. "​ Revelation 11:15.
In fulfillment of Jesus’ model prayer, God’s Kingdom will fully accomplish God’s will on earth.
Under it, all mankind will learn how to care for the planet so that it will be healthy again and teem with life.
Above all, God’s Kingdom will educate its subjects.
All will be taught the same standards.
There will be no discord or division.
"They will not cause any harm or any ruin . . . because the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters cover the sea, " says Isaiah 11:9.
Earth’s inhabitants will truly be what the United Nations would like people to be​ peace-loving global citizens.
"They will find exquisite delight in the abundance of peace, " says Psalm 37:11.
In time, words like "crime, " "pollution, " "poverty, " and "war " will disappear from our vocabulary.
But when will this happen?
Yes, when will God’s Kingdom take charge?
How will it do so?
And how can you benefit from its rule? Let us now see.
KEY POINT
GOD’S KINGDOM IS A WORLD GOVERNMENT CREATED BY GOD.
ITS SUBJECTS WILL NOT BE SEPARATED BY POLITICAL BORDERS BUT WILL BE FULLY UNITED AND AT PEACE
THEY PROMOTED THE IDEA OF A WORLD GOVERNMENT
Dante
Dante believed that peace could not last in a politically divided world
Einstein Einstein called upon the United Nations to "create the necessary conditions for international security by laying the foundations for a real world government "
Under God’s Kingdom "Peace Will Abound "
Soon the long-awaited Kingdom of God​ a world government set up by God ​will bring global peace and harmony to the earth.
"Peace will abound, " as promised at Psalm 72:7.
But when will the Kingdom take charge? How will it do so?
And how can you benefit from Kingdom rule?
WHEN WILL GOD’S KINGDOM COME?
The Bible foretold a number of striking events that would signal that God’s Kingdom is coming soon.
Those events make up a composite "sign " that includes international warfare, famine, disease, many earthquakes, and an increase in lawlessness.​ Matthew 24:3, 7, 12; Luke 21:11; Revelation 6:2-8.
Another prophecy states: "In the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here.
For men will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, . . . disobedient to parents, unthankful, disloyal, having no natural affection, not open to any agreement, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, without love of goodness, . . . puffed up with pride, lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God. " (2 Timothy 3:1-4) Traits such as these have always been manifest to some extent.
But now they are commonplace.
Those prophecies began to be fulfilled in the year 1914.
Indeed, historians, statesmen, and writers have commented on how the world changed after that year.
For example, Danish historian Peter Munch wrote: "The outbreak of the war in 1914 is the great turning point in the history of humanity.
From a bright epoch of progress, . . . we entered an age of disaster, horror, and hatred, with insecurity everywhere. "
On the positive side, those conditions are like a storm before the calm.
They show that Kingdom rule over all the earth is near.
In fact, Jesus included this positive element in his sign of the end: "This good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come. "​ Matthew 24:14.
That good news is a central theme of the message of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Indeed, their leading journal is entitled The Watchtower Announcing Jehovah’s Kingdom.
Now available in more than 338 languages, The Watchtower regularly discusses the wonderful things that God’s Kingdom will do for mankind and the earth.
HOW WILL GOD’S KINGDOM TAKE CONTROL?
The answer involves these four important facts:
The Kingdom will not operate through or be represented by the political leaders of the present world.
The world’s political leaders, in an attempt to cling to power, will foolishly defy rule by God’s Kingdom.​ Psalm 2:2-9.
God’s Kingdom will need to destroy the political kingdoms that want to continue dominating mankind.
(Daniel 2:44; Revelation 19:17-21) This final global conflict is called Armageddon.​ Revelation 16:14, 16.
All who willingly submit to God’s Kingdom will be preserved through Armageddon into a peaceful new world.
They will make up what the Bible calls "a great crowd, " likely numbering into the millions.​ Revelation 7:9, 10, 13, 14.
HOW WILL THE KINGDOM RULE?
When Jesus was on earth, he gave us a preview of what he will do as King of God’s Kingdom.
He healed the sick and the disabled.
(Matthew 4:23) He fed many thousands.
(Mark 6:35-44) He even controlled the natural elements.​ Mark 4:37-41.
Jesus teaches people who have gathered around him
Above all, Jesus taught people how to live together in peace and harmony.
All who humbly apply his teachings develop personality traits that will enable them to live happily under his Kingdom forever.
No other educator can accomplish that.
Fine examples of Jesus’ teachings can be found in what is known as the Sermon on the Mount, found in Matthew chapters 5-7.
Why not read it?
The words themselves are simple.
But the message is profound and truly touches the heart.
HOW CAN YOU BENEFIT FROM KINGDOM RULE?
A first step to becoming a subject of God’s Kingdom is education.
Indeed, Jesus said in prayer to God: "This means everlasting life, their coming to know you, the only true God, and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ. "​ John 17:3.
When people come to know Jehovah God as a Person, they benefit in many ways.
Consider just two: First, they develop strong faith in him.
That faith, which is based on evidence, convinces them that God’s Kingdom is a reality and that its rule is near.
(Hebrews 11:1) Second, they grow in love for God and for neighbor.
Love for God impels them to obey him with a willing heart.
Love for neighbor moves them to apply Jesus’ words that are often called the Golden Rule.
It states: "Just as you want men to do to you, do the same way to them. "​ Luke 6:31.
Like a loving father, our Creator wants the very best for us.
He wants us to experience what the Bible calls "the real life. " (1 Timothy 6:19) Life today is not "the real life. "
For millions, it is little more than existence​ and is perilous at that.
To give you a preview of that "real life, " consider some of the wonderful things that God’s Kingdom will do for its subjects.
A PREVIEW OF THE REAL LIFE
"In his days [Christ’s rule as King] the righteous will flourish, and peace will abound . . .
He will have subjects . . . to the ends of the earth. "​ Psalm 72:7, 8, 13, 14.
"[God] is bringing an end to wars throughout the earth.
He breaks the bow and shatters the spear. "​ Psalm 46:9.
"There will be an abundance of grain on the earth; on the top of the mountains it will overflow. "​ Psalm 72:16.
"They will build houses and live in them, and they will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage.
They will not build for someone else to inhabit, nor will they plant for others to eat. . . .
The work of their hands my chosen ones will enjoy to the full. "​ Isaiah 65:21, 22.
"The tent of God is with mankind . . .
He will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. "​ Revelation 21:3, 4.
People enjoy life in Paradise
Under Kingdom rule, people will be safe and secure and they will have an abundance of food
KEY POINT
JESUS’ TEACHINGS GIVE MORAL AND SPIRITUAL STRENGTH.
ALL WHO RESPOND MAY BECOME TRUE GLOBAL CITIZENS, PEACE-LOVING SUBJECTS OF HIS WORLD GOVERNMENT
Have You Wondered?
A father and son look at jw.org together
If God cares about us, why has he allowed evil and suffering to go on for so long?
How can we be sure that we are living in the last days of the present world?
How do we know that the Bible’s promises about God’s Kingdom will come true?
Can the Bible help us make wise decisions in life now?
Because our Creator loves us, he has provided answers to those questions and many others.
To help you find those answers, go to our website, www.jw.org, which is dedicated to Bible education.
On that website, you will find activities, articles, audio and video recordings, interviews, and a broad variety of publications, including the Bible.
All are free of charge with no obligation.
"Thy Kingdom Come " ​A Prayer Repeated by Millions of People
Have you ever prayed for God’s Kingdom to come?
Over the centuries, millions have repeated the words "Thy kingdom come. "
Why have they prayed that way?
Because Jesus told his followers to pray for God’s Kingdom.
At first, Jesus’ followers did not understand everything he said about the Kingdom.
They once asked him: "Lord, are you restoring the kingdom to Israel at this time? "
They were probably surprised when Jesus did not give them a direct answer.
(Acts 1:6, 7) Does that mean we cannot find out what God’s Kingdom is and when it will come?
Not at all!
This issue of The Watchtower will help you find answers to the following questions:
Why do we need God’s Kingdom?
Who is the King of God’s Kingdom?
When will God’s Kingdom rule the earth?
What will God’s Kingdom accomplish?
Why choose to support God’s Kingdom now?
What is God’s Kingdom?
Why Do We Need God’s Kingdom?
At the start of human history, our Creator, whose name is Jehovah, was the only Ruler.
He governed in a loving way.
He made a beautiful home​ a garden in Eden ​for humans to live in.
He also provided an abundance of food for them.
In addition, he gave humans meaningful work to do.
(Genesis 1:28, 29; 2:8, 15) Mankind would have enjoyed peace if they had remained under God’s loving rulership.
Adam holding the forbidden fruit that Eve has offered him.
The first humans rejected God as their Ruler
The Bible reveals that a rebellious angel, later called Satan the Devil, challenged God’s right to rule.
He implied that humans would be happier without God’s direction and rulership.
Sadly, our first parents, Adam and Eve, followed Satan’s course and rebelled against God.​ Genesis 3:1-6; Revelation 12:9.
Because Adam and Eve rejected God as their Ruler, they lost their Paradise home and the hope of living forever in perfect health.
(Genesis 3:17-19) Their decision also affected the children they eventually had.
The Bible says that because Adam sinned, "sin entered into the world and death through sin. "
(Romans 5:12) Sin led to another tragic result: "Man has dominated man to his harm. "
(Ecclesiastes 8:9) In other words, when humans rule themselves, problems are bound to come.
HUMAN RULERSHIP APPEARS
Nimrod standing with an arrogant pose.
In the background, people are constructing a building.
Nimrod rebelled against Jehovah
The first human ruler mentioned in the Bible was Nimrod.
And he rebelled against Jehovah’s rulership.
Ever since Nimrod’s day, powerful men have abused their positions of authority.
Some 3,000 years ago, King Solomon wrote: "I saw the tears of the oppressed, and there was no one to comfort them.
And their oppressors had the power. "​ Ecclesiastes 4:1.
Things are no different today.
In 2009, a United Nations publication said that bad rulership is increasingly being viewed as "one of the root causes of all evil within our societies. "
TIME FOR ACTION!
The world needs better rulers and a better form of government.
And that is what our Creator has promised!
Collage: The results of human government.
1. An Asian woman sitting on a dirty street while holding her crying child. 2.
A sick older man in a hospital bed.
3. Soldiers firing their weapons in a battlefield. 4.
Angry protesters shouting and holding banners.
5. A woman and her daughter standing outside their home, finding the glass on their front door broken.
6. A smoggy city with smokestacks and power cables.
Even the best human governments have failed to solve mankind’s serious problems
God has set up a Kingdom, or government, that will replace all human rule, and "it alone will stand forever. "
(Daniel 2:44) This is the Kingdom for which millions have been praying.
(Matthew 6:9, 10) But God will not rule this government himself.
Instead, he has appointed someone who lived as a human to be the Ruler.
Whom has God chosen?
Who Is the King of God’s Kingdom?
God had several Bible writers record details identifying the One who would become the King of God’s Kingdom.
This Ruler would be
Chosen by God.
"I myself have installed my king . . .
I will give nations as your inheritance and the ends of the earth as your possession. "​ Psalm 2:6, 8.
An heir of King David.
"A child has been born to us, a son has been given to us . . .
To the increase of his rulership and to peace, there will be no end, on the throne of David and on his kingdom in order to establish it firmly. "​ Isaiah 9:6, 7.
Born in Bethlehem.
"O Bethlehem . . . , from you will come out for me the one to be ruler . . .
His greatness will reach the ends of the earth. "​ Micah 5:2, 4.
Rejected by men and executed.
"He was despised, and we held him as of no account. . . .
He was pierced for our transgression; he was crushed for our errors. "​ Isaiah 53:3, 5.
Raised from the dead and glorified.
"You will not leave me in the Grave.
You will not allow your loyal one to see the pit. . . .
There is happiness at your right hand forever. "​ Psalm 16:10, 11.
Jesus Christ Ideally Qualified
In all human history, only one person has fit the description of an ideal Ruler; that person is Jesus Christ.
In fact, an angel had told Mary, Jesus’ mother: "God will give him the throne of David his father, . . . and there will be no end to his Kingdom. "​ Luke 1:31-33.
Jesus never became a ruler on earth.
Rather, he is to rule mankind from heaven as King of God’s Kingdom.
What makes him an ideal Ruler?
Consider what Jesus did while on earth.
Jesus cared for people.
Jesus helped men and women, young and old, regardless of their background or status.
(Matthew 9:36; Mark 10:16) When a leper pleaded: "If you just want to, you can make me clean, " Jesus was moved with pity and cured him.​ Mark 1:40-42.
Jesus taught us how to please God.
He said: "You cannot slave for God and for Riches. "
He also said that we must treat others as we would like others to treat us​ a principle that has come to be called the Golden Rule.
In addition, he showed that God is interested not only in what we do but also in how we think and feel.
So to please God, we must control what we feel in our heart.
(Matthew 5:28; 6:24; 7:12) Jesus emphasized that for us to be truly happy, we must learn what God wants us to do and then do it.​ Luke 11:28.
Jesus taught what it means to love.
Jesus’ words and actions were powerful and touched his listeners’ hearts.
"The crowds were astounded at his way of teaching, for he was teaching them as a person having authority. "
(Matthew 7:28, 29) He taught them: "Love your enemies. "
He even prayed in behalf of some of those who were responsible for his death: "Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they are doing. "​ Matthew 5:44; Luke 23:34.
Jesus is perfectly qualified to be an effective world Ruler who is helpful and kind.
But when does he begin to rule?
When Will God’s Kingdom Rule the Earth?
Some of Jesus’ faithful followers wanted to know when God’s Kingdom would begin ruling.
Jesus answered their question by saying that they would not know exactly when it would rule over the earth.
(Acts 1:6, 7) But, earlier, he had told them that when his followers saw a certain group of events happening all at once, they would "know that the Kingdom of God [was] near " and that the time for it to rule the world had come.​ Luke 21:31.
WHAT EVENTS DID JESUS SAY WOULD HAPPEN?
Jesus said: "Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.
There will be great earthquakes, and in one place after another food shortages and pestilences. "
(Luke 21:10, 11) Like the lines that form a fingerprint, all these events together form an unmistakable sign.
And just as a fingerprint identifies a person, these events happening at the same time identify that "the Kingdom of God is near. "
Have such events occurred together and become visible on a worldwide scale?
Consider the evidence. 1. WARS
Fighter jets, a war tank, and missiles.
In 1914, war broke out on a scale never seen before in all human history!
Historians often refer to the year 1914 as a turning point in history because it is when the first-ever world war began.
That war introduced the first large-scale use of tanks, aerial bombs, machine guns, poisonous gas, and other deadly weapons.
It was followed by the second world war, a war that gave birth to atomic weapons.
Mankind has been fighting wars in one place or another ever since 1914, and those wars have killed millions of people.
2. EARTHQUAKES
An earthquake causing buildings to crack.
Every year there are about 100 earthquakes that are large enough to cause "substantial damage, " says Britannica Academic.
And the United States Geological Survey reports that "according to long-term records (since about 1900), we expect about 16 major earthquakes in any given year. "
Though some might attribute the apparent increase in earthquakes to better detection, the fact is that great earthquakes around the world are causing suffering and loss of life on an unprecedented scale.
3. FOOD SHORTAGES
A line graph showing a decrease in grain production.
Food shortages occur worldwide because of war, corruption, economic collapse, poor management of agriculture, or lack of planning for extreme weather.
The World Food Programme’s "2018 Year in Review " states: "Across the world, 821 million people are going hungry​ 124 million acutely so. "
Malnutrition has contributed to the death of about 3.1 million children each year.
In the year 2011, this was the cause of about 45 percent of all child deaths worldwide. 4.
DISEASES AND EPIDEMICS
Symbols of biochemical hazards and bacteria.
A World Health Organization publication states: "The 21st century has already been marked by major epidemics.
Old diseases​ cholera, plague and yellow fever ​have returned, and new ones have emerged​ SARS, pandemic influenza, MERS, Ebola and Zika. "
Even though scientists and doctors have learned much about sicknesses, they have not been able to find a cure for all diseases.
5.
A WORLDWIDE PREACHING WORK
The earth with an arrow encircling it and an open Bible next to it.
Jesus pointed out another part of the sign when he foretold: "This good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come. "
(Matthew 24:14) While the world is experiencing terrible problems, over eight million people from all nations are declaring the good news of God’s Kingdom in 240 lands and in over 1,000 languages.
This has never happened before in human history.
WHAT DOES THE SIGN MEAN FOR US?
The events making up the sign Jesus gave are happening today.
Why should we be interested in that fact?
Because Jesus said: "When you see these things happening, know that the Kingdom of God is near. "​ Luke 21:31.
Jesus sitting on a throne in heaven, as King, above an earthly paradise.
Soon, the Kingdom will ensure that God’s will is done on earth
The sign that Jesus gave, along with Bible chronology, helps us understand that God set up his Kingdom in heaven in the year 1914.
At that time, he installed his Son, Jesus Christ, as King.
(Psalm 2:2, 4, 6-9) Soon, God’s Kingdom will rule the earth, and it will remove all rival rulerships and make the earth a paradise for humans to live in forever.
Shortly, the words of the model prayer that Jesus taught will be fulfilled: "Let your Kingdom come.
Let your will take place, as in heaven, also on earth. "
(Matthew 6:10) What, though, has the Kingdom been doing since it took power in 1914?
And what can we look forward to when the Kingdom takes complete rulership of mankind?
What Will God’s Kingdom Accomplish?
Jesus taught his disciples to pray for the Kingdom to come.
He knew that the terrible things happening on the earth are not what God wants and that God’s Kingdom is the only government that can fix these problems.
What will God’s Kingdom accomplish?
WHAT GOD’S KINGDOM HAS ALREADY DONE
In the preceding article, we considered the sign Jesus gave.
That sign provides visible proof that God’s Kingdom has been established in heaven with Jesus Christ as King.
The Bible says that on taking Kingdom power, Jesus would expel Satan and his demons from heaven.
Their activity is now restricted to the earth, which is one of the reasons why things have become so bad since the year 1914.​ Revelation 12:7, 9.
Despite worsening world conditions, Jesus, as King of God’s Kingdom, has done things to help people around the earth.
Thanks to the worldwide Bible educational work that Jesus foretold, many are learning and applying Bible principles in their daily life.
(Isaiah 2:2-4) Millions have learned to have a balanced view of work, to improve their family life, and to enjoy material things without becoming slaves to them.
These people are learning to benefit themselves now and are becoming the kind of people God wants as subjects of his Kingdom.
WHAT WILL GOD’S KINGDOM ACCOMPLISH NEXT?
Although Jesus is already ruling in heaven, human governments still rule on earth.
However, God has directed Jesus: "Go subduing in the midst of your enemies. "
(Psalm 110:2) Soon, Jesus will completely destroy all opposers and bring relief to those who are willing to obey God.
During that time, God’s Kingdom will take action to
Abolish false religion.
Religions that have taught lies about God and that have made life difficult for people will be gone.
The Bible portrays false religion as a prostitute.
Its destruction will come as a shock to many.​ Revelation 17:15, 16. End human rulership.
God’s Kingdom will take action to put an end to all human rulership.​ Revelation 19:15, 17, 18.
Remove wicked people.
What about those who are determined to do what is bad and who refuse to obey God?
"As for the wicked, they will be cut off from the earth. "​ Proverbs 2:22.
Eliminate Satan and the demons.
Satan and the demons will be unable to "mislead the nations anymore. "​ Revelation 20:3, 10.
What will all of this mean for those who accept God’s Kingdom?
WHAT GOD’S KINGDOM WILL DO FOR MANKIND
Ruling as King in heaven, Jesus will accomplish much more than any human ruler ever could.
He will be assisted by 144,000 corulers, who are chosen from among mankind.
(Revelation 5:9, 10; 14:1, 3) He will make sure that God’s will is carried out here on earth.
What will God’s Kingdom do for earth’s inhabitants?
Eliminate sickness and death.
"No resident will say: ‘I am sick,’ " and "death will be no more. "​ Isaiah 33:24; Revelation 21:4.
Ensure true peace and security.
"The peace of your sons will be abundant, " and "they will sit, each one under his vine and under his fig tree, and no one will make them afraid. "​ Isaiah 54:13; Micah 4:4.
Provide meaningful work.
"The work of their hands my chosen ones will enjoy to the full.
They will not toil for nothing. "​ Isaiah 65:22, 23.
Solve environmental problems.
"The wilderness and the parched land will exult, and the desert plain will be joyful and blossom as the saffron. "​ Isaiah 35:1.
Teach people what they need to do in order to live forever.
"This means everlasting life, their coming to know you, the only true God, and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ. "​ John 17:3.
God wants you to enjoy those blessings.
(Isaiah 48:18) The next article will explain what you can do now to be part of this wonderful future.
God’s Kingdom will undo all the harm that millenniums of human rule have done.
It will provide
A couple jogging in a wooded area.
PERFECT HEALTH
A family enjoying a picnic in a park.
The father is playing a guitar.
PEACE AND SECURITY
A couple working in their garden. MEANINGFUL WORK
A river flowing toward a waterfall.
The river is surrounded by snowcapped mountains and a forest.
A CLEAN ENVIRONMENT
Choose to Support God’s Kingdom Now!
Imagine that a devastating hurricane is approaching your area.
Government agencies are broadcasting urgent warnings: "GET OUT! SEEK REFUGE NOW! "
What would be the wise thing to do?
Head for a safe place, certainly.
In a sense, all of us are living in the path of a devastating "storm, " which Jesus called a "great tribulation. "
(Matthew 24:21) We cannot simply get out of the path of that tribulation.
But we can do something to protect ourselves.
What is that?
In his Sermon on the Mount, Jesus Christ gave this direction: "Keep on, then, seeking first [God’s] Kingdom and his righteousness. "
(Matthew 6:33) How do we do that?
Seek first the Kingdom of God.
This means that we should view God’s Kingdom as being more important than anything else.
(Matthew 6:25, 32, 33) Why should we view it that way?
Because humans are just not able to solve mankind’s problems.
Only God’s Kingdom can accomplish that difficult job.
Seek his righteousness.
We should try our best to live by God’s righteous laws and principles.
Why?
Because if we decide for ourselves what is right and what is wrong, the results will be bad.
Keep on seeking first God’s Kingdom and his righteousness.
Jesus warned that some might get sidetracked, thinking they can find security in making as much money as possible.
Others may let anxieties of life overwhelm them to the point that they have no time to seek God’s Kingdom.​ Matthew 6:19-21, 25-32.
However, Jesus promised that those who support God’s Kingdom will have what they need now and enjoy endless blessings in the future.​ Matthew 6:33.
Even though Jesus’ disciples in the first century were seeking first God’s Kingdom and his righteousness, they did not see the end of all pain and suffering in their lifetime. But they were protected.
How?
Their strong faith that the Kingdom would come helped them to face even the severest of problems.
And God gave them "the power beyond what is normal " so that they could cope.​ 2 Corinthians 4:7-9.
WILL YOU SEEK FIRST THE KINGDOM?
Christians in the first century obeyed Jesus’ command to seek first the Kingdom.
They preached the Kingdom good news throughout their part of the world.
(Colossians 1:23) Is anyone doing that today?
Yes! Jehovah’s Witnesses realize that the time left before God’s Kingdom brings an end to this current system of things is short.
So they do all they can to live by Jesus’ words: "This good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come. "​ Matthew 24:14.
How will you respond to the good news?
We urge you to imitate the first-century inhabitants of the Macedonian city of Beroea.
When they heard the good news about the Kingdom from the apostle Paul, they accepted his message "with the greatest eagerness of mind. "
Then they ‘carefully examined the Scriptures’ to verify what they had heard, and they acted on what they learned.​ Acts 17:11, 12.
Around the world, millions have taken steps to support God’s Kingdom
Jehovah’s Witnesses talking to a man at the door of his home.
Listen to the Kingdom good news
The same man is studying the Bible at his home with one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Carefully examine the Scriptures
The man is attending a meeting at a Kingdom Hall.
Associate with those who support the Kingdom
The man is praying before reading the Bible.
Show God that you want to serve him
You can do the same.
By seeking first God’s Kingdom and his righteousness, you will find refuge and protection now and enjoy lasting peace and security in the future.
God’s Kingdom​ What Is It?
A man reading a Bible while sitting on a bench in front of a government building.
Many people pray for God’s Kingdom to come, but have you ever wondered what God’s Kingdom is and what it will do?
CONSIDER WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS:
What is God’s Kingdom?
It is a heavenly government ruled by Jesus Christ as King.​ Isaiah 9:6, 7; Matthew 5:3; Luke 1:31-33.
What will God’s Kingdom accomplish?
It will put an end to all bad things and bring lasting peace to people on earth.​ Daniel 2:44; Matthew 6:10.
What does it mean to seek first the Kingdom?
It means to support God’s Kingdom and to trust that only it will make conditions on earth the way God wants them to be.​ Matthew 6:33; 13:44.
When a Spouse Is Unfaithful
"I wanted to die when my husband said that he was leaving me for a younger woman.
It all seemed so unfair, especially when I remembered the sacrifices I had made for him. "​ Maria, Spain.
"When my wife suddenly left me, it seemed that something died inside me.
Our dreams, our hopes, and our plans had been destroyed.
There were days when I thought I was free from anxiety, only to find myself back in the depths of despair. "​ Bill, Spain.
MARITAL unfaithfulness is devastating.
True, some mates have found that they can forgive a repentant spouse and rebuild their relationship.
But whether the marriage survives or not, those who discover that their mate has been unfaithful invariably suffer intense agony.
How can such ones deal with their fragile emotions?
BIBLE VERSES THAT CAN HELP
Despite the heartache, many innocent spouses have found comfort in the Scriptures.
They have learned that God sees their tears and shares their pain.​ Malachi 2:13-16.
"When anxieties overwhelmed me, you comforted and soothed me. "​ Psalm 94:19.
"As I read that verse, I imagined Jehovah soothing my pain tenderly, as a compassionate father would, " recalls Bill.
"With someone loyal you act in loyalty. "​ Psalm 18:25.
"My husband had not been loyal, " explains Carmen, whose husband had been unfaithful for months.
"But I could trust in Jehovah’s loyalty.
He would never let me down. "
"Do not be anxious over anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication . . . let your petitions be made known to God; and the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts. "​ Philippians 4:6, 7.
"I read this text over and over again, " says Sasha.
"As I prayed more and more, God gave me peace in my life. "
All those quoted above felt like giving up at times.
But they trusted in Jehovah God and drew strength from his Word.
Bill put it this way: "My faith gave meaning to my life when everything else seemed to have collapsed.
Though I walked for a time ‘in the valley of deep shadow,’ God was with me. "​ Psalm 23:4.
How Some Have Coped
Meditate on comforting scriptures.
"I read the book of Job and then the Psalms, " explains Bill, "underlining every passage that seemed to fit my own circumstances.
I realized that these Bible writers had experienced the kind of pain and anxiety that I was feeling. "
Find consolation in music.
"When I could not sleep at night, I listened to music, " Carmen remembers.
"This was a great source of comfort. "
Daniel says: "I learned to play the guitar and found that the harmony needed for the music helped me recover my inner peace and harmony. "
Talk about your feelings.
"I was not used to talking about my feelings, " Daniel says.
"But I had some good friends, and I reached out to them every day.
I unburdened my feelings on them, both in writing and in conversation.
That really helped. "
Sasha says: "The help of my family was crucial.
My mother was always there for me.
If I wanted to talk, she was there to listen.
My father also made me feel secure, and he helped me recover at my own pace. "
Persist in prayer.
"I prayed constantly, " says Carmen.
"I felt that God was near to me, listening to me, and helping me.
Through this terrible time, I drew closer to God. "
When You Feel You Cannot Go On
"These feelings were relentless, " admits Adriana, from Brazil.
"So I concluded that it would be better to end my life. "
HAVE YOU ever felt so bad that you no longer wanted to live?
Then you may understand how Adriana felt.
She suffered from acute anxiety and felt sad and hopeless.
Adriana was diagnosed with clinical depression.
Consider, too, a Japanese man named Kaoru, who cared for his sickly, aged parents.
"At the time, I was overwhelmed by extreme pressure at work, " he explains.
"In time I lost my appetite, and my sleep was terribly disturbed.
I came to think how relieved I would be if I could just die. "
A Nigerian man named Ojebode says, "I was always sad to the point of shedding tears, so I looked for a means to end my life. "
Thankfully, Ojebode, Kaoru, and Adriana did not take their lives.
But every year hundreds of thousands do.
WHERE TO FIND HELP
Most people who commit suicide are men, many of whom felt too ashamed to ask for help.
Jesus said that sick people need a physician.
(Luke 5:31) So if you have such feelings, please do not be ashamed to seek help.
Many people who suffer from depression have found that medical treatment can help them to cope.
Ojebode, Kaoru, and Adriana all received professional help and now cope much better.
Doctors may use medication or talk therapy or both to treat depression.
Those who suffer also need the empathetic support of patient, caring family and friends.
The best friend anyone can have is Jehovah God, who provides wonderful help in his Word, the Bible.
IS THERE A PERMANENT SOLUTION?
Victims of depression often need prolonged treatment and have to learn how to cope by making adjustments to their lifestyle.
But if you struggle with depression, you can look forward to a bright future, as does Ojebode.
He says, "I look forward to seeing the fulfillment of Isaiah 33:24, which foretells the time when no one on earth will say ‘I am sick.’
" Like Ojebode, take comfort in God’s promise of "a new earth, " where "pain " will be no more.
(Revelation 21:1, 4) That promise includes an end to all mental and emotional pain.
Your painful feelings will be gone forever.
Never again will your painful feelings "be called to mind, nor will they come up into [your] heart. "​ Isaiah 65:17.
Bible Verses That Can Help
God understands your feelings.
"I, Jehovah your God, am grasping your right hand, . . . saying to you, ‘Do not be afraid.
I will help you.’ "​ Isaiah 41:13.
Jehovah understands our feelings better than anyone else, and he wants to help us.
Meditate on God’s Word.
"[Elijah] asked that he might die.
He said: ‘ . . .
O Jehovah, take my life away.’ "​ 1 Kings 19:4.
"Meditating on God’s Word helped me, " says Ojebode.
"I realized that the prophet Elijah once felt just as I did. "
Learn from Bible examples.
"I [Jesus] have made supplication for you [Peter] that your faith may not give out. "​ Luke 22:32.
After the apostle Peter denied Jesus three times, his feelings were hard for him to bear and he wept bitterly.
"Peter’s experience, " says Kaoru, "helped me to see that Jehovah and Jesus cared about Peter’s feelings.
This encouraged me. "
Never again will your painful feelings "be called to mind, nor will they come up into [your] heart. "​ Isaiah 65:17
Why Life IS Worth Living
Faizal required major heart surgery just over a year after his wife died.
He says: "When I read the book of Job, I know Jehovah put it there for a reason.
When we find an example in the Bible that we can relate to, it is a way of soothing our pain of heart. "
He adds: "Life is still worth living. "
Tarsha was young when her mother died.
She says: "Knowing our Creator is what gives life purpose, hope, and joy despite all the things we may have to deal with.
Jehovah is more than capable of sustaining us and helping us to get through each day. "
THE PRECEDING articles show how various traumatic events can make life seem unbearable.
As you carry your own personal burden, you may wonder if life is worthwhile or whether anyone even cares about you.
Be assured that God does care about your distress.
You are precious to him.
The writer of Psalm 86 expressed confidence toward God: "I call on you in the day of my distress, for you will answer me. "
(Psalm 86:7) You may wonder, though, ‘How will God answer me "in the day of my distress "?’
Although God may not take away your problems immediately, his Word, the Bible, assures you that he can give you inner peace to help you cope: "Do not be anxious over anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving, let your petitions be made known to God; and the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your thoughts. "
(Philippians 4:6, 7, footnote) Please consider how the following Bible verses give us assurance of God’s tender care.
God Does Care About You
"Not one [sparrow] is overlooked by God. . . .
You are worth more than many sparrows. "​ Luke 12:6, 7, footnote.
CONSIDER: Seemingly insignificant birds are not inconsequential to God.
Not even one tiny sparrow escapes God’s notice; every one is a precious living creature.
Humans are far more valuable to God than sparrows are.
Humans, as the centerpiece of God’s earthly creation, are made in his "image " and are capable of cultivating and displaying his elevated qualities.​ Genesis 1:26, 27.
"O Jehovah, you have searched through me, and you know me. . . . You discern my thoughts . . .
Examine me, and know my anxious thoughts. "​ Psalm 139:1, 2, 23.
CONSIDER: God knows you personally.
He knows your most intimate feelings and concerns.
While others may not understand your distressing situation, God cares about you and wants to help you.
That makes life worth living.
Your Life Has Meaning
"O Jehovah, hear my prayer; let my cry for help reach you. . . .
Incline your ear to me; do answer me quickly when I call. . . .
He will pay attention to the prayer of the destitute. "​ Psalm 102:1, 2, 17.
CONSIDER: It is as if from the very start of human suffering, Jehovah had been keeping a record of every tear humans have shed.
(Psalm 56:8) This includes your tears.
God remembers all your trials and tears because you are precious to him.
"Do not be anxious, for I am your God.
I will fortify you, yes, I will help you . . .
I, Jehovah your God, am . . . the One saying to you, ‘Do not be afraid.
I will help you.’ "​ Isaiah 41:10, 13.
CONSIDER: God is ready to help you.
If you fall down, he will lift you up.
There Is Hope for a Better Future
"God loved the world so much that he gave his only-begotten Son, so that everyone exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life. "​ John 3:16.
CONSIDER: You are so dear to God that he willingly gave his Son, Jesus, as a sacrifice in your behalf.
This sacrifice gives you the prospect of living a happy and purposeful life forever.
Although you may be troubled and your life may seem to be unbearable, make a careful study of God’s Word and build your faith in the hope that God promises.
It will make you happy and confident that life is worth living.
"He Cares for You "
A young woman smiles and confidently walks along a crowded sidewalk
Even if others in your life may fail you, there is One who will never leave you.
Who is that?
King David of old said: "Even if my own father and mother abandon me, Jehovah himself will take me in. "​ Psalm 27:10.
Jehovah is "the Father of tender mercies and the God of all comfort, who comforts us in all our trials. "​ 2 Corinthians 1:3, 4.
"Throw all your anxiety on him, because he cares for you. "​ 1 Peter 5:7.
To learn how God wants to care for you, see chapter 12 of the book What Can the Bible Teach Us? published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Also available at www.jw.org
The Search for Truth
Knowing the truth can be a matter of life and death.
For example, consider how our lives have been affected by the answer to the following question, How do infectious diseases spread?
For thousands of years, no one really knew the answer to that question.
Meanwhile, plagues and epidemics took millions of lives.
Eventually, scientists learned the truth.
They discovered that diseases were often caused by germs​ microorganisms, such as bacteria or viruses.
Finding out that one truth has helped people prevent and treat many diseases, which has led to billions of people living longer and healthier lives.
What about other important questions?
How do you think the search for truth about the following questions could affect you?
Who is God?
Who is Jesus Christ?
What is the Kingdom of God?
What does the future hold?
Millions of people have found the answers to those questions and have improved the quality of their life.
You too can benefit from the answers.
CAN YOU FIND TRUTH?
You may wonder, ‘How is it possible to find out the truth about anything?’
After all, finding out the truth about many things seems to be getting more and more difficult.
Why?
Many people do not trust governments, businesses, or the media to tell them the truth.
They find it difficult to distinguish facts from opinions, half-truths, and outright lies that are presented as reliable information.
In this climate of distrust and misinformation, people disagree not only on how to interpret the facts but also on what the actual facts are.
Despite such challenges, it is possible to find truthful answers to life’s most important questions. How?
By applying skills you use in everyday life.
YOUR SEARCH FOR TRUTH
To some extent, you search for truth every day.
Consider Jessica’s situation.
"My daughter’s peanut allergy is so severe, " she says, "that even a trace amount of peanut protein can be fatal. "
Jessica needs to know that the food she buys will be safe for her daughter.
"My first step is to read food labels carefully to check the ingredients.
Then I do further research and even contact the manufacturer to confirm that there is no risk of cross contamination.
I also consider other reliable sources that can vouch for the company’s reputation for following safe food practices. "
The same man looks at one book he has chosen from the bookshelves and compares it with what he has found on his electronic device
Your daily search for truth may not be as critical as Jessica’s, but like Jessica, you may use the following approach to find answers to questions you have:
Get the facts.
Do additional research.
Make sure your sources are credible.
This same process can help you find truthful answers to life’s big questions.
How?
A UNIQUE BOOK OF TRUTH
When searching for Bible truth, Jessica used a similar approach to the one she uses when researching her daughter’s food allergies.
She says, "Careful reading and diligent research helped me find the truth in the Bible. "
Like Jessica, millions of people have learned what the Bible says about these questions:
Why are we here?
What happens at death?
Why is there suffering?
What is God doing to end all suffering?
How can we have a happy family life?
The same man reads the Bible and has his laptop computer open
You can find truthful answers to these and other questions by reading the Bible and doing additional research online at www.jw.org.
This issue of The Watchtower will examine the following questions:
Who is God?
Who is Jesus Christ?
What is the Kingdom of God?
What does the future hold?
First, though, let us begin by considering why we can trust the Bible as a reliable source of truth.
The Bible ​A Reliable Source of Truth
Throughout history, people from many backgrounds have considered the Bible to be a reliable source of truth.
Today, millions follow its teachings.
Yet others dismiss the Bible as being irrelevant or fictitious.
What do you think?
Can you find truth in the Bible? WHY YOU CAN TRUST THE BIBLE
How can you determine if the Bible merits your trust?
Consider an illustration: If a friend consistently told you the truth over many years, you would likely consider him trustworthy.
Has the Bible, like a trustworthy friend, consistently told the truth?
Note some examples. Truthful Writers
Icon of a writer’s hand
Bible writers were very honest, often revealing their own mistakes and failings.
For example, the prophet Jonah wrote about his own disobedience.
(Jonah 1:1-3) In fact, he concluded his Bible book by revealing how God chastised him, yet he made no mention of how he corrected his own attitude.
(Jonah 4:1, 4, 10, 11) The honesty of all the Bible writers indicates their sincere concern for truth.
Practical Truth
Does the Bible always give sound advice about practical matters?
It certainly does.
For example, note what the Bible says about maintaining healthy relationships: "All things, therefore, that you want men to do to you, you also must do to them. "
(Matthew 7:12) "A mild answer turns away rage, but a harsh word stirs up anger. "
(Proverbs 15:1) Yes, Bible truths remain as practical today as the day they were written.
Historical Truth
Icon of a shovel and dirt
Many archaeological discoveries over the years verify the existence of various peoples and places and the accuracy of events mentioned in the Bible.
As an example, consider the evidence for one minor detail.
The Bible states that in the time of Nehemiah, Tyrians (Phoenicians from Tyre) who lived in Jerusalem "were bringing in fish and all kinds of merchandise. "​ Nehemiah 13:16.
Is there any evidence to support this Bible verse?
Yes, there is.
Archaeologists have discovered Phoenician goods in Israel, suggesting trade between the two ancient nations.
Furthermore, in Jerusalem, the remains of Mediterranean fish have been unearthed.
Archaeologists believe that the fish were brought from the distant coast by merchants.
After analyzing the evidence, one scholar concluded: "The statement in Neh[emiah] 13:16 that the Tyrians sold fish in Jerusalem is quite plausible. "
Scientific Truth
Icon of the earth suspended upon nothing in outer space
The Bible is primarily a religious and historical book.
But when it touches on scientific matters, it harmonizes with true science.
Note one example.
About 3,500 years ago, the Bible stated that the earth is suspended "upon nothing. "
(Job 26:7) This differed greatly from the myths that described the earth as floating on water or being carried by a giant tortoise.
Some 1,100 years after the book of Job was written, people continued to believe that the earth could not just hang in midair; it had to have something to rest upon.
Only three hundred years ago, in 1687, Isaac Newton published his work on gravity and explained that the earth is held in orbit by an invisible force.
This scientific milestone confirmed what the Bible had stated more than 3,000 years earlier!
Prophetic Truth
Icon of Babylon’s walls and open gate
How accurate are the Bible’s many prophecies?
Consider one example: Isaiah’s prophecy about the fall of Babylon.
The Prophecy: In the eighth century B.C.E., the Bible writer Isaiah declared that Babylon​ which was only later to become the capital of a powerful empire ​would be overthrown and eventually become uninhabited.
(Isaiah 13:17-20) Isaiah even named the man who would carry this out​ Cyrus.
He also described Cyrus’ strategy, stating that rivers would "dry up. "
And he foretold that the city gates would be left open.​ Isaiah 44:27–45:1.
The Fulfillment: Some 200 years after Isaiah’s prophecy, a Persian king attacked Babylon.
His name?
Cyrus.
Because Babylon was heavily fortified, Cyrus turned his attention to the Euphrates River, which ran through the city.
His men dug a canal upstream to divert the river into a marshland.
This dropped the river level enough to make it possible for Cyrus’ army to march through the thigh-deep water of the riverbed, which adjoined the city walls.
Incredibly, the Babylonians had left the gates that faced the river open!
Cyrus’ army entered Babylon through the open gates and overthrew it.
However, one detail remained: Did Babylon become uninhabited?
For some centuries, people continued living there.
But today, Babylon’s ruins​ near Baghdad, Iraq ​testify to the prophecy’s complete fulfillment.
Yes, the Bible is reliable even when it discusses future events.
A RELIABLE SOURCE OF TRUTH
But what truths does the Bible contain?
Can these benefit you?
The rest of this magazine will discuss some important Bible truths.
We will begin with what the Bible reveals about its author​ God.
The Truth About God and Christ
Although humans worship many gods, there is only one true God.
(John 17:3) He is "the Supreme One, " the Creator of everything and the Source of all life.
He alone is worthy of our worship.​ Daniel 7:18; Revelation 4:11.
Who Is God? An open Bible
God’s name appears in the original text SOME 7,000 TIMES
JEHOVAH is God’s name
LORD, GOD, FATHER​ Some of Jehovah’s titles
What Is God’s Name?
God himself says: "I am Jehovah.
That is my name. "
(Isaiah 42:8) The personal name of God appears some 7,000 times in the Bible.
However, many Bible translations improperly substitute this name with a title, such as "Lord. "
God wants you to be his friend, so he encourages you to "call on his name. "​ Psalm 105:1.
Jehovah’s Titles.
The Bible refers to Jehovah by such titles as "God, " "Almighty, " "Creator, " "Father, " "Lord, " and "Sovereign. "
Many prayers are recorded in the Bible in which Jehovah is addressed by both a respectful title and his personal name, Jehovah.​ Daniel 9:4.
God’s Form. God is an invisible spirit.
(John 4:24) The Bible confirms that "no man has seen God. "
(John 1:18) The Bible reveals his feelings.
People can cause him grief, or they can "bring pleasure to him. "​ Proverbs 11:20; Psalm 78:40, 41.
God’s Wonderful Attributes.
God is impartial toward people of all nations and backgrounds.
(Acts 10:34, 35) He is also "merciful and compassionate, slow to anger and abundant in loyal love and truth. "
(Exodus 34:6, 7) However, four attributes of God are especially appealing. Power.
Since he is "God Almighty, " he has unlimited power to accomplish whatever he promises.​ Genesis 17:1.
Wisdom.
God’s wisdom surpasses that of anyone else.
In that sense the Bible says that he "alone is wise. "​ Romans 16:27.
Justice.
God always does what is right.
His actions are "perfect, " and he "is never unjust. "​ Deuteronomy 32:4.
Love. The Bible says that "God is love. " (1 John 4:8) Not only does God show love​ he is the very personification of love.
His superlative love influences everything he does, and it benefits us in many ways.
God’s Friendship With Humans.
God is our loving heavenly Father.
(Matthew 6:9) If we put faith in him, we can be his friends.
(Psalm 25:14) In fact, God invites you to draw close to him in prayer and to "throw all your anxiety on him, because he cares for you. "​ 1 Peter 5:7; James 4:8.
What Is the Difference Between God and Christ?
Jesus prays Jesus Is Not God.
Jesus is unique​ he is the only person created directly by God.
That is why the Bible calls him God’s Son.
(John 1:14) After creating Jesus, Jehovah used his firstborn as "a master worker " to create everything and everyone else.​ Proverbs 8:30, 31; Colossians 1:15, 16.
Jesus Christ never claimed to be God.
Instead, he explained: "I am a representative from [God], and that One sent me. "
(John 7:29) When speaking to one of his disciples, Jesus called Jehovah "my Father and your Father " and "my God and your God. "
(John 20:17) After Jesus died, Jehovah resurrected him to life in heaven and gave him great authority at His right hand.​ Matthew 28:18; Acts 2:32, 33.
Jesus Christ Can Help You Draw Close to God Jesus came to the earth to teach us about his Father.
Jehovah himself said about Jesus: "This is my Son, the beloved.
Listen to him. "
(Mark 9:7) Jesus knows God better than anyone else.
He said: "No one knows who the Father is except the Son and anyone to whom the Son is willing to reveal him. "​ Luke 10:22.
Jesus accepts a piece of fruit from a little girl as adults look on
Jesus reflects God’s qualities perfectly.
Jesus imitated his Father’s qualities so closely that he could say: "Whoever has seen me has seen the Father also. "
(John 14:9) Jesus drew people to God by reflecting his Father’s love in his own words and deeds.
He said: "I am the way and the truth and the life.
No one comes to the Father except through me. "
(John 14:6) He also said: "True worshippers will worship the Father with spirit and truth, for indeed, the Father is looking for ones like these to worship him. "
(John 4:23) Imagine that!
Jehovah is looking for people like you who want to know the truth about him.
The Truth About the Kingdom of God
Jesus taught his followers to pray: "Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified. Let your Kingdom come.
Let your will take place, as in heaven, also on earth. "
(Matthew 6:9, 10) What is God’s Kingdom?
What does it do?
And why should we pray for it? Jesus is the King of God’s Kingdom.
Luke 1:31-33: "You are to name him Jesus.
This one will be great and will be called Son of the Most High, and Jehovah God will give him the throne of David his father, and he will rule as King over the house of Jacob forever, and there will be no end to his Kingdom. "
The Kingdom was the central theme of Jesus’ preaching.
Matthew 9:35: "Jesus set out on a tour of all the cities and villages, teaching in their synagogues and preaching the good news of the Kingdom and curing every sort of disease and every sort of infirmity. "
Jesus gave his disciples a sign to help them know when the Kingdom was about to come.
Matthew 24:7: "For nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be food shortages and earthquakes in one place after another. "
Jesus’ disciples now preach about the Kingdom earth wide.
Matthew 24:14: "And this good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come. " God’s Kingdom​ The Facts
Location.
Purpose.
God’s Kingdom will transform the earth into a paradise home where all humans will live in peace and harmony and never get sick or die.​ PSALM 37:11, 29.
Rulers. God appointed Jesus as the King to rule in heaven along with 144,000 corulers, who are bought from the earth.​ LUKE 1:30-33; 12:32; REVELATION 14:1, 3.
Subjects. The subjects of the Kingdom will live on earth and willingly submit to Jesus’ rulership and obey the Kingdom’s laws. ​ MATTHEW 7:21.
Why Jesus Is Best Qualified to Rule Mankind
While on earth, Jesus proved that he would be a capable and loving ruler because he
Showed concern for the poor.​ LUKE 14:13, 14.
Hated corruption and injustice.​ MATTHEW 21:12, 13.
Controlled the forces of nature.​ MARK 4:39. Fed thousands of people.​ MATTHEW 14:19-21.
Felt pity for the sick and cured all who were suffering.​ MATTHEW 8:16.
Raised the dead back to life.​ JOHN 11:43, 44. How God’s Kingdom Can Benefit You Now
You can live a happier life now if you become a subject of God’s Kingdom.
For example, subjects of the Kingdom "Pursue peace with all people. "​ HEBREWS 12:14.
Enjoy peace and unity in the family because marriage mates love and respect each other.​ EPHESIANS 5:22, 23, 33.
Have a happy and fulfilling life because of being "conscious of their spiritual need. "​ MATTHEW 5:3.
The Truth About the Future Have you ever wondered what the future holds?
The Bible shows that significant events just ahead of us will affect all people on earth.
Jesus explained how we would "know that the Kingdom of God is near. "
(Luke 21:31) He prophesied that, among other things, there would be great wars, major earthquakes, food shortages, and pestilences​ the very things we are witnessing today.​ Luke 21:10-17.
The Bible further shows that the "last days " of human rulership would be identified by the way people behave or, more precisely, misbehave.
You can read the description at 2 Timothy 3:1-5.
When you see these attitudes and actions today, no doubt you agree that this Bible prophecy closely matches what is happening now.
What does this mean?
The time is near for God’s Kingdom to make big changes that will significantly affect life on earth for the better.
(Luke 21:36) In the Bible, God promises good things for the earth and for the people who will live on it.
Here are a few examples. GOOD RULERSHIP
"And to him [Jesus] there were given rulership, honor, and a kingdom, that the peoples, nations, and language groups should all serve him.
His rulership is an everlasting rulership that will not pass away, and his kingdom will not be destroyed. "​ DANIEL 7:14.
What this means: You can enjoy life under a superior global government that God sets up with his Son as King.
GOOD HEALTH A young girl steps out of her wheelchair and walks
"No resident will say: ‛I am sick.’ "​ ISAIAH 33:24.
What this means: You will never get sick or be disabled; you will be able to live without ever dying.
TOTAL PEACE
An assault rifle broken in pieces
"He is bringing an end to wars throughout the earth. "​ PSALM 46:9.
What this means: There will be no more threat of war and all the suffering it causes.
THE EARTH WILL BE FILLED WITH GOOD PEOPLE
"The wicked will be no more . . .
The meek will possess the earth. "​ PSALM 37:10, 11.
What this means: There will be no more evil people, only people eager to obey God.
THE EARTH WILL BE A GLOBAL PARADISE
"They will build houses and live in them, and they will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage. "​ ISAIAH 65:21, 22.
What this means: The whole earth will be made beautiful.
God will fulfill our prayer that his will be done "on earth. "​ Matthew 6:10.
People enjoy life in Paradise What the Truth Can Do for You
God, who can only ever speak truth, offers you the hope of "everlasting life. "​ John 3:16.
WHAT DO YOU NEED TO DO? A young woman in a café reads the Bible on her electronic device
Learn what God’s Word of truth says.​ John 17:3, 17. Choose to obey God.​ Deuteronomy 30:19, 20.
Apply God’s practical guidance in your life.​ James 1:25.
Jehovah’s Witnesses all over the world are experiencing the benefits of learning the truth from the Bible.
They will be happy to share what they are learning with you.
To learn more about God’s purpose for humans, see chapter 3 of the book What Can the Bible Teach Us? published by Jehovah’s Witnesses and available online at www.jw.org.
Matthew
1:1-25
1 Genealogy of Jesus Christ, son of David, son of Abraham:
2 Abraham had a son Isaac; and Isaac, Jacob; and Jacob, Judah and his brothers; 3 and Judah, Peres and Zerah by Tamar; and Peres, Hesron; and Hesron, Ram; 4 and Ram, Amminadab; and Amminadab, Nahshon; and Nahshon, Salmon; 5 and Salmon, Boaz by Rahab; and Boaz, Obed by Ruth; and Obed, Jesse; 6 and Jesse, king David; and David, Solomon by Uriah’s widow; 7 and Solomon, Rehoboam; and Rehoboam, Abijah; and Abijah, Asa; 8 and Asa, Jehoshaphat; and Jehoshaphat, Jehoram; and Jehoram, Uzziah; 9 and Uzziah, Jotham; and Jotham, Ahaz; and Ahaz, Hezekiah; 10 and Hezekiah, Manasseh; and Manasseh, Amon; and Amon, Josiah; 11 and Josiah, Jeconiah and his brothers, at the time of the removal to Babylon.
12 And after the removal to Babylon Jeconiah had a son Shealtiel; and Shealtiel, Zerubbabel; 13 and Zerubbabel, Abihud; and Abihud, Eliakim; and Eliakim, Azzur; 14 and Azzur, Sadok; and Sadok, Jachin; and Jachin, Elihud; 15 and Elihud, Eleazar; and Eleazar, Mattan; and Mattan, Jacob; 16 and Jacob, Joseph, the husband of Mary who had for her son Jesus, known as the Messiah.
17 So there are in all fourteen generations from Abraham down to David, and fourteen generations from David down to the removal to Babylon, and fourteen generations from the removal to Babylon down to the Messiah.
18 And the birth of Jesus Christ was thus: His mother Mary being engaged to Joseph, before they came together it was found that she was pregnant by the Holy Spirit.
19 And Joseph her husband, being an honest man and unwilling to make a spectacle of her, wanted to divorce her privately.
20 But while he was thinking of this, lo, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying "Joseph, son of David, do not be afraid to take your wife Mary.
For what has been generated in her is by the Holy Spirit; 21 and she shall bear a son, and you shall name him Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins.
22 And all this has come to pass in order that what was said by the Lord through the prophet in the words 23 ‘Lo, the maiden shall be pregnant and bear a son, and they shall name him Immanuel’ " which means "God-is-with-us " "should be fulfilled. " 24 And on waking from his sleep Joseph did as the angel of the Lord directed him, and took his wife 25 and did not know her until she bore a son, and named him Jesus. Matthew
2:1-23 2 And after Jesus was born at Bethlehem in Judea in the days of Herod the king, lo, magi from the East arrived in Jerusalem 2 saying "Where is the King of the Jews that has been born? for we saw his star coming up and have come to do him reverence. " 3 And at hearing it King Herod was alarmed, and all Jerusalem with him; 4 and he called together all the chief priests and scribes of the people, and inquired of them where the Messiah was to be born.
5 And they said to him "At Bethlehem in Judea; for so it is written through the prophet, 6 ‘And you, Bethlehem, land of Judah, are by no means least among the chieftains of Judah; for out of you shall come a ruler who shall govern my people Israel.’ " 7 Then Herod called the magi privately and got from them the precise time of the star’s appearing, 8 and sent them to Bethlehem and said "Go and learn the precise facts about the child, and when you find him bring word to me, so that I may come myself and do him reverence. " 9 And they listened to the king and went; and lo, the star that they had seen coming up went ahead of them till it came and stood still over where the child was; 10 and when they saw the star they were glad, and their gladness was very great.
11 And they came to the house and saw the child with Mary his mother, and prostrated themselves and did him reverence; and they opened their coffers and offered gifts to him, gold and frankincense and myrrh.
12 And, it being revealed to them in a dream that they should not go back to Herod, they withdrew to their own country by another route.
16 Then Herod was greatly enraged at seeing that he had been made a fool of by the magi, and sent and took the lives of all the boys in Bethlehem and in all its territory, from two years old down, to correspond to the precise time which he had got from the magi.
17 Then what was said through the prophet Jeremiah in the words 18 "A sound was heard in Ramah, weeping and much lamenting Rachel weeping for her children and not letting herself be comforted, because they are not " was fulfilled.
19 And after Herod’s death, lo, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in Egypt in a dream, 20 saying "Rise, take the child and his mother, and go to the land of Israel; for those who were seeking the child’s life are dead. " 21 And he rose, took the child and his mother, and came into the land of Israel.
22 But, hearing that Archelaus was king of Judea in place of his father Herod, he was afraid to go there, and, a revelation being made to him in a dream, he withdrew to the parts of Galilee, 23 and came and settled in a city called Nazareth, so that what was said through the prophets, "He shall be called a Nazarene, " should be fulfilled.
Matthew 3:1-17
5 Then Jerusalem and all Judea and all the region of the Jordan went out to him 6 and had themselves baptized in the river Jordan by him, confessing their sins.
10 And the ax is already lying at the root of the trees, so every tree that does not produce good fruit is to be cut out and thrown into a fire.
11 I am baptizing you in water to repentance, but he who is coming behind me is stronger than I, whose shoes I am not fit to carry: he will baptize you in Holy Spirit and fire 12 he whose winnowing-fork is in his hand, and who will clean up his threshing-floor and gather his wheat into his barn, but burn up the chaff with inextinguishable fire. " 13 Then came Jesus from Galilee to John at the Jordan to be baptized by him.
14 But John checked him, saying "I need to be baptized by you, and are you coming to me? " 15 But Jesus answered him "Let me now, for it befits us to fulfill all righteousness thus. "
Then he let him. 16 And when Jesus was baptized, at once he came up from the water, and lo, the sky opened and he saw God’s Spirit come down like a dove and come upon him; 17 and lo, a voice out of the sky saying "This is my dear son in whom I take pleasure. "
Matthew 4:1-25
4 Then Jesus was brought up to the wilderness by the Spirit to be tempted by the Devil.
2 And upon fasting forty days and forty nights he afterward grew hungry.
12 But upon hearing that John was committed to prison he retired to Galilee, 13 and left Nazareth and came and settled in Capernaum on the seacoast, in the territory of Zebulun and Naphtali, 14 that what was said through the prophet Isaiah in the words 15 "The land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, seaward on the other side of the Jordan, Galilee of the nations 16 the people that was sitting in darkness has seen a great light, and to those who were sitting in the country and shadow of death a light has risen, " might be fulfilled.
17 Thenceforth Jesus began to proclaim "Repent, for the Reign of Heaven is almost here. "
18 And in walking by the Sea of Galilee he saw two brothers, Simon, the one who is known as Peter, and his brother Andrew, throwing a casting-net in the sea for they were fishermen 19 and said to them "Come here after me, and I will make you fishers of men "; 20 and they left their nets at once and followed him.
21 And he went on from there and saw two other brothers, James the son of Zebedee and his brother John, in their boat with their father Zebedee putting their nets to rights, and called them; 22 and they left the boat and their father at once and followed him.
23 And he went around in all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues and proclaiming the gospel of the Reign and curing every disease and every ailment among the people.
5:1-48
5 And when he saw the crowds he went up on the mountainside; and he sat down, and his disciples came to him, 2 and he opened his mouth and taught them, saying
3 "Happy are the poor at heart, because the Reign of Heaven is theirs.
4 Happy are mourners, because they shall be comforted.
5 Happy are the meek, because they shall inherit the earth.
6 Happy are the hungry and thirsty for righteousness, because they shall have their meal.
7 Happy are the pitiful, because they shall be pitied.
8 Happy are the clean in mind, because they shall see God.
9 Happy are peacemakers, because they shall be called sons of God.
10 Happy are the persecuted who have been persecuted on account of righteousness, because the Reign of Heaven is theirs.
11 Happy are you when they twit you and persecute you and say everything vile about you falsely on my account; 12 be glad and exult, because your reward is great in heaven, for thus they persecuted the prophets who came before you.
13 "You are the salt of the earth; but if salt loses its strength, with what shall it be salted? it will no longer do for anything but to be thrown out and trodden underfoot by men.
14 You are the light of the world; a city located on a mountaintop cannot be hidden, 15 nor do they light a lamp and put it under the peck measure, but on the stand and it shines for everybody in the house.
16 Let your light shine thus before men, so that they may see your good deeds and glorify your Father in heaven.
17 "Do not suppose that I came to tear down the law or the prophets; I did not come to tear down but to fill up.
18 For I tell you verily, till the heavens and the earth pass away, not the dot of an i nor the cross of a t in the law shall pass away, till everything is done.
19 So whoever breaks one of the pettiest of those commandments, and teaches men so, shall be called petty in the Reign of Heaven; but whoever does them and teaches them shall be called great in the Reign of Heaven.
20 For I tell you that unless your righteousness outdoes the scribes and Pharisees you shall not get into the Reign of Heaven.
21 "You have heard that it was said to the ancients ‘You shall not commit murder; and whoever commits murder shall be liable to judgment.’ 22 But I tell you that anyone who is angry with his brother shall be liable to judgment; and whoever says ‘Raka’ to his brother shall be liable to the Sanhedrin Court; and whoever says ‘You fool’ shall be liable to the fire of hell.
23 So, if you are offering your gift on the altar and there remember that your brother has something against you, 24 leave your gift there before the altar and go and make up with your brother first; then come and offer your gift.
25 Be quick to make friends with your antagonist while you are on the road to court with him, for fear your antagonist should hand you over to the judge, and the judge to the officer, and you be thrown into prison; 26 I tell you verily, you shall not get out from there till you pay the last copper.
27 "You have heard that it was said ‘You shall not commit adultery.’ 28 But I tell you that anyone who looks at a woman to desire her has already committed adultery with her in his heart.
29 And if your right eye is tripping you up, take it out and throw it from you; for it is well for you that one of your organs should perish and not your whole body be thrown into hell.
30 And if your right hand is tripping you up, cut it away and throw it from you; for it is well for you that one of your organs should perish and not your whole body go to hell.
31 "And it was said ‘Whoever divorces his wife, let him give her a certificate of divorce.’ 32 But I tell you that anyone who divorces his wife, except on grounds of unchastity, causes her to commit adultery, and whoever marries a divorced woman commits adultery.
33 "Again, you have heard that it was said to the ancients ‘You shall not perjure yourself, but discharge your oaths to the Lord.’ 34 But I tell you not to swear at all; neither by heaven, because it is God’s throne, 35 nor by the earth, because it is the footstool of his feet, nor by Jerusalem, because it is the city of the great King.
36 And do not swear by your head either, because you cannot make one hair white or black.
37 But let your language be yes, yes, no, no; anything in excess of this is so much of bad.
38 "You have heard that it was said ‘an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.’ 39 But I tell you not to oppose the bad; but whoever slaps you on your right cheek, turn him the other too, 40 and when a man wants to sue you and get your shirt let him have your cloak too, 41 and go two miles with whoever requisitions you for one.
42 Give to him who asks you, and do not turn your back on him who wants to borrow from you.
43 "You have heard that it was said ‘you shall love your neighbor and hate your enemy.’ 44 But I tell you, love your enemies and pray for your persecutors, 45 so as to act as sons of your Father in heaven, because he makes his sun rise on bad and good, and sends rain on honest men and rascals.
46 For if you love those who love you, what reward do you have? do not even customhouse officers do the same? 47 and if you salute only your brothers, what are you doing that is special? do not even the heathen do the same?
48 "So you are to be thorough as your heavenly Father is thorough.
Matthew
6:1-34
6 But beware of doing your righteousness before men, to be viewed by them; if you do, you have no reward with your Father in heaven.
2 So when you give charity do not have a trumpet blown before you as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, so that they may be glorified by men; I tell you verily, they have got their reward.
3 But at your giving charity let your left hand not find out what your right is doing, 4 so that your charity may be under cover, and your Father who sees under cover will repay you.
5 "And when you pray you are not to be as the hypocrites are; for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and at the corners of the main streets, so that they may be visible to men; I tell you verily, they have got their reward.
6 But do you, when you pray, go into your closet, and shut the door and pray to your Father who is present in hidden places; and your Father who sees in hidden places will reward you.
7 And in praying do not parrot off words like the heathen; for they think they will get themselves listened to by the quantity of what they say.
8 So do not be like them; for your Father knows the things you need before you ask him.
9 Do you, then, pray in this way: ‘Father in heaven, may thy name be kept holy, 10 thy reign come, than will be done on earth as in heaven; 11 give us today our next day’s bread, 12 and forgive us our debts as we too have forgiven our debtors, 13 and do not have us fall under temptation but deliver us from evil.’ 14 For if you forgive men their offenses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you; 15 but if you do not forgive men, no more will your Father forgive your offenses.
16 "And when you are fasting do not be lugubrious like the hypocrites; for they make their faces unsightly so that it may be seen by men that they are fasting; I tell you verily, they have got their reward.
17 But do you in fasting put oil on your head and wash your face, 18 so that it may not be seen by men that you are fasting but by your Father who is present in secret places; and your Father who sees in secret places will reward you,
19 "Do not lay up stores for yourselves on earth where moth and decay consume, and where thieves break in and steal, 20 but lay up stores for yourselves in heaven where neither moth nor decay consumes and where thieves do not break in nor steal; 21 for where your stores are, there your heart too will be.
22 The lamp of the body is the eye; therefore if your eye is free your whole body will be light, 23 but if your eye is mean your whole body will be dark, so if the light in you is darkness, what must the darkness be! 24 No one can belong to two masters, for he will either hate the one and love the other or be attentive to the one and despise the other: you cannot belong to God and money.
25 For this reason I tell you, do not fret over your soul what you shall eat or what you shall drink, nor over your body what you shall put on; is not the soul more than the food, and the body than the garment? 26 Look at the birds of the air, that they do not sow nor reap nor gather into barns, and your heavenly Father feeds them; are you not more important than they? 27 and which of you by fretting can add to his height one foot? 28 And why do you fret about dress?
Observe the lilies of the field, how they grow: they do not labor nor spin, 29 but I tell you not even Solomon in all his glory was clad like one of these.
30 But if God robes the plants in the field so, that are there today and are thrown in a firepot tomorrow, will he not much more you, little-faiths? 31 So do not fret and say ‘What shall we eat?’ or ‘What shall we drink?’ or ‘What shall we wrap ourselves in?’ 32 for the foreigners hunt after all this.
For your heavenly Father knows that you want all this.
33 But seek first the Reign, and his righteousness, and you will have all this added.
34 So do not fret over tomorrow, for to morrow will do its own fretting; a day’s evil is a sufficiency for that day.
7:1-29
7 "Do not be judging, 2 that you may not be judged; for the judgments that you pass shall be passed upon you, and the measure that you give shall be given to you.
3 And why is it that you can see the particle of straw in your brother’s eye, but do not observe the beam of timber in your own eye? 4 or how will you say to your brother ‘Let me get the particle out of your eye,’ when in your eye there is the timber? 5 Hypocrite, first get the timber out of your eye, and then you will have good eyesight to get the particle out of your brother’s eye.
6 "Do not give sacred things to the dogs, nor throw your pearls before the hogs, for fear they should trample them with their feet and turn and tear you to pieces.
7 "Ask, and you will have things given to you; look, and you will find; knock, and you will be opened to.
8 For every asker receives, and the seeker finds, and the knocker will be opened to.
9 Or what man is there of you that his son will ask for bread and he will hand him a stone? 10 or ask for a fish and he will hand him a snake? 11 So if you, being bad, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father in heaven give good things to those who ask him!
12 "Everything that you want to have men do to you, then, do so yourselves to them; for this is the law and the prophets.
13 "Enter by the narrow gate, because wide and spacious is the road that leads to perdition, and many are they who enter it, 14 because narrow is the gate and contracted the road that leads to life, and few are they who find it.
15 Beware of pretended prophets who come to you in the garb of sheep but are rapacious wolves inside.
16 You will recognize them by their fruits: do people pick grapes from thorns or figs from cockleburs? 17 thus every good tree produces good fruit, but a foul tree produces bad fruit.
18 A good tree cannot bear bad fruit, nor a foul tree good fruit.
19 Every tree that does not produce good fruit is cut out and thrown into a fire.
20 Hence you will recognize them by their fruits.
21 Not everyone who says to me ‘Lord, Lord’ will get into the Reign of Heaven, but he who does the will of my Father in heaven: 22 many will say to me in that day ‘Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy by your name and expel demons by your name and work many miracles by your name?’ 23 and then ‘I will avow to them ‘I never knew you; begone from me, you that practice wickedness.’
24 "So everyone who hears these words of mine and does them will resemble a sensible man who built his house on the rock; 25 and the rain came down and the rivers ran and the winds blew, and they struck against that house and it did not fall, for it was founded on the rock.
26 And everyone that hears these words of mine and does not do them will resemble a foolish man who built his house on the sand; 27 and the rain came down and the rivers ran and the winds blew, and they beat against that house and it fell, and its fall was great. "
28 And when Jesus had finished these words the crowds were astonished at his teaching; 29 for he taught them as having authority, and not like their scribes.
8:1-34
8 And when he came down from the mountain great crowds followed him.
2 And lo, a leper approached him and did him reverence, saying "Sir, if you will you can cleanse me. " 3 And he reached out his hand and touched him, saying "I will; be cleansed "; and at once his leprosy was cleansed.
4 And Jesus said to him "See that you do not tell anybody, but go show yourself to the priest and offer the gift that Moses directed, for an attestation to them. "
5 And when he came into Capernaum a centurion approached him, appealing to him with the words 6 "Sir, my boy is in the house down with paralysis and suffering frightful tortures. " 7 He said to him "I will come and cure him. " 8 But the centurion answered "Sir, I am not fit to have you come under my roof, but just say the word and my boy will be healed.
9 For I too am a man under authority, with soldiers under me; and I say to this one ‘Go,’ and he goes; and to another ‘Come,’ and he comes; and to my servant ‘Do this,’ and he does it. " 10 And at hearing it Jesus wondered, and said to those who were following "I tell you verily, I have not found in Israel so much faith shown by anyone.
11 But I tell you many will come from the east and the west and go to the table with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the Reign of Heaven, 12 but the native sons of the Reign will be put out into the outside darkness; there will the weeping and the grinding of teeth be. " 13 And Jesus said to the centurion "Go, have it as you believed "; and the boy was healed at that moment.
14 And Jesus came into Peter’s house and saw his mother-in-law down with a fever; 15 and he touched her hand, and the fever left her, and she rose and waited on his needs.
16 And when evening was come they brought him many demoniacs; and he expelled the spirits by his word, and cured all that were ill, 17 so that what was said through the prophet Isaiah in the words "He took our sicknesses and carried our diseases " should be fulfilled.
18 But Jesus, seeing a crowd around him, gave the word to go off to the other side.
19 And a scribe approached him and said to him "Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go. " 20 And Jesus said to him "The foxes have dens and the birds of the air have roosts, but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head. " 21 And another of his disciples said to him "Sir, permit me first to go and bury my father. " 22 But Jesus said to him "Follow me, and leave the dead to bury their dead. "
23 And when he got into the boat his disciples followed him.
24 And lo, there came a great commotion in the sea, so that the boat was being covered by the waves; and he was asleep.
25 And they approached him and roused him, saying "Help, sir! we are lost! " 26 And he said to them "Why are you timorous, little-faiths? " Then he rose and rebuked the winds and the sea, and there came a great calm.
27 But the men wondered, saying "What a man this is, that even the winds and the sea obey him! "
28 And when he came to the other side, to the country of the Gadarenes, there met him two demoniacs coming out of the tombs, exceedingly intractable, so that nobody was able to pass along that road; 29 and lo, they screamed out "What have we to do with you, Son of God? have you come here to torture us before it is time? " 30 And a long way off from them there was a numerous herd of hogs feeding; 31 and the demons appealed to him with the request "If you are expelling us, send us into the herd of hogs. " 32 And he said to them "Go. "
And they came out and went into the hogs, and lo, all the herd bolted down the steep bank into the sea, and lost their lives in the water; 33 and the men who were tending them ran away, and went to the city and reported everything, including the part about the demoniacs.
34 And out came all the city to meet Jesus; and when they saw him they appealed to him to pass on away from their territory;
9:1-38
9 and he got into a boat and crossed over and came to his own city.
2 And lo, they brought him a paralyzed man lying helpless on a couch.
And Jesus, seeing their faith, said to the paralyzed man "It is all right, my child, your sins are forgiven. " 3 Said some of the scribes to themselves, "This man is blaspheming. " 4 And Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said "What are you inwardly thinking wicked thoughts for? 5 why, which is easier, to say ‘your sins are forgiven’ or to say ‘rise and walk’? 6 But, that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins " then he said to the paralyzed man, "Rise, take up your couch and go home. " 7 And he rose and went off to his home.
8 And at this sight the crowds were afraid and glorified God who had given such authority to men.
9 And in passing on his way from there Jesus saw sitting in a customhouse office a man known as Matthew, and said to him "Follow me "; and he rose and followed him.
10 And as he was eating a meal in the house, there came to the table with Jesus and his disciples many customhouse officers and people of bad character.
11 And the Pharisees, seeing it, said to his disciples "Why does your teacher eat with the customhouse officers and people of bad character? " 12 But he, hearing it, said "Not the able-bodied, but the ill, need a physician.
13 But go and learn what ‘I want pity, and not sacrifice’ is; for I have not come to call saints, but sinners. "
14 Then John’s disciples came to him with the words "Why is it that we and the Pharisees fast, but your disciples do not? " 15 And Jesus said to them "Can the wedding guests mourn, as long as the bridegroom is with them? but there will come days, when the bridegroom is taken from them, and then they will fast.
16 But nobody puts a patch of unfulled cloth on an old cloak; for the filler takes away some from the cloak, and a worse hole is made.
17 Neither do they put new wine in old skins; if they do, the skins burst, and the wine runs out and the skins are wasted; but they put new wine into fresh skins, and both together are preserved. "
18 While he was telling them this, lo, a ruler approached him and did him reverence, saying "My daughter is just passing away; but come and lay your hand on her, and she will live. " 19 And Jesus and his disciples rose and followed the man.
20 And lo, a woman who had had a flow of blood for twelve years came up behind and touched the tassel of his cloak; 21 for she said to herself, "If I only touch his cloak I shall be made well. " 22 But Jesus turned and saw her and said "It is all right, daughter, your faith has made you well. "
And the woman was well from that moment.
23 And when Jesus came into the ruler’s house and saw the flute-players, and the crowd making a commotion, 24 he said "Stand aside, for the girl is not dead but asleep "; and they laughed at him.
25 But when the crowd was put out he went in and grasped her hand, and the girl woke up.
26 And the rumor of this went out to that whole land.
27 And as Jesus was passing on his way from there two blind men followed him, crying out "Take pity on us, Son of David. " 28 And when he came into the house the blind men came up to him; and Jesus said to them "Do you believe I can do this? "
They said to him "Yes, sir. " 29 Then he touched their eyes, saying "Have it as you have faith for "; 30 and their eyes were opened.
And Jesus said to them sternly "See that nobody finds it out. " 31 But they went out and spread the report about him in that whole land.
32 And as these were going out, lo, they brought him a dumb man who was demon-ridden; 33 and when the demon was expelled the dumb man spoke.
And the crowds wondered, saying "Never was the like seen in Israel "; 34 but the Pharisees said "It is by having the head of the demons that he expels the demons. "
35 And Jesus went the round of all the cities and villages, teaching in their synagogues and proclaiming the gospel of the Reign and curing every disease and every ailment.
36 But at seeing the crowds he was sorry for them because they were harassed and homeless like sheep without a shepherd.
37 Then he said to his disciples "The crop to harvest is great, but the workers are few; 38 so beg the owner of the crop to send out workers to his harvest ";
10:1-42
10 and, calling to him his twelve disciples, he gave them authority over unclean spirits to expel them, and to cure every disease and every ailment.
2 And these are the names of the twelve apostles: first Simon known as Peter, and his brother Andrew, and James the son of Zebedee and his brother John, 3 Philip and Bartholomew, Thomas and Matthew the customhouse officer, James the son of Alpheus and Thaddeus, 4 Simon the Kananee and Judas Iscariot the same who was the agent in his arrest.
5 These twelve Jesus sent out, instructing them thus:
"Do not go off on any route among the nations nor into a city of the Samaritans; 6 go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, 7 and as you go proclaim that the Reign of Heaven is almost here.
8 Cure sick men, raise dead men, cleanse lepers, expel demons. You received gratis, give gratis.
9 Do not get gold nor silver nor copper to take in your belts, 10 no traveling-wallet nor two coats nor shoes nor a walking-stick; for a worker deserves his food.
11 And whatever city or village you come into, find out who in it is deserving, and stay there till you come out.
12 And in coming into the house salute it; 13 and if the house is deserving let your peace come upon it, but if it is not deserving let your peace come back to you.
14 And whoever does not receive you nor hear your words, shake out the dust from your feet in coming out from that house or city; 15 I tell you verily, it will be more bearable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for that city.
16 "Here I am sending you out like sheep among wolves; so be as cunning as snakes and as innocent as doves.
17 But beware of men; for they will have you arrested and taken into court, and flogged in their synagogues; 18 and you will be brought before governors and kings on my account, for an attestation to them and the nations.
19 But when they have you arrested, do not fret over how or what you are to speak; for it will be given to you at that moment what to speak, 20 for it is not you that speak but your Father’s Spirit that speaks in you.
21 "And a brother will have a brother arrested and put to death, and a father a child; and children will stand up against parents and have them put to death; 22 and you will be hated by all because of my name; but he who holds out to the end, he will come safe through.
23 But when they persecute you in this city flee to the other; for I tell you verily you will not finish the cities of Israel till the Son of Man comes. 24 "A pupil is not above his teacher nor a servant above his master.
25 It is sufficient for the pupil that he be made like his teacher, and the servant like his master.
If they have dubbed the head of the house Beelzebul, how much more will they the rest of his family! 26 So do not fear them.
27 What I tell you in the dark, say in the light; and what you hear whispered in your ear, proclaim on the roofs.
28 And do not fear those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul, but fear rather him who can destroy both soul and body in hell.
29 Why, sparrows are sold two for a penny, and not one of them will fall to the earth without your Father; 30 but of your heads even the hairs are all counted; 31 so do not fear, you are more important than a great many sparrows.
32 Everyone who shall acknowledge me before men, then, I myself will acknowledge before my Father in heaven; 33 but whoever repudiates me before men I myself will repudiate before my Father in heaven.
34 "Do not suppose that I came to launch peace on the earth: I did not come to launch peace, but the sword, 35 for I came to put a man in antagonism to his father and a daughter to her mother and a daughter-in-law to her mother-in-law, 36 and the members of a man’s family shall be his enemies.
37 He who loves father or mother above me is not worthy of me; and he who loves son or daughter above me is not worthy of me; 38 and he who does not take his cross and follow after me is not worthy of me.
39 He who finds his self shall lose it, and he who loses his self on my account shall find it. 40 "He who receives you is receiving me, and he who receives me is receiving him who sent me.
41 He who receives a prophet as being a prophet shall get a prophet’s reward, and he who receives a saint as being a saint shall get a saint’s reward; 42 and anybody who gives one of these little ones just a cup of cold water to drink as being a disciple, I tell you verily, shall not lose his reward. "
11:1-30
11 And when Jesus had finished giving directions to his twelve disciples he passed on from there to teach and make the proclamation in their cities.
2 And John, hearing in his prison the deeds of the Messiah, sent by his disciples 3 and said to him "Are you the Coming One or are we to expect another? " 4 And Jesus answered them "Go and report to John what you hear and see: 5 blind men are recovering their sight and cripples are walking, lepers are being cleansed and deaf men are hearing, and dead men are being raised and poor men are being given the gospel; 6 and happy is anyone who is not staggered over me. "
7 And while these were on their way Jesus began to say to the crowds about John "What did you go out into the wilderness for? to gaze at reeds shaking in the wind? 8 But what did you go out for? to see a man robed in soft fabrics? for the wearers of soft fabrics, go to kings’ houses.
9 But what did you go out for? to see a prophet?
Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet; 10 this is he of whom it is written ‘Lo, I am sending before your face my messenger who shall prepare your road before you,’ 11 I tell you verily, there has not arisen among all that are born of women a greater than John the Baptist; but the littlest in the Reign of Heaven is greater than he.
12 But from John the Baptist’s days till now the Reign of Heaven is being forced and violent men are pouncing on it.
13 For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John’s coming; 14 and if you are willing to have it, he is the Elijah who was to come; 15 let him who has ears hear! 16 But to what shall I compare this generation? it is like children sitting in the marketplaces, that call out to the others 17 and say ‘We played to you and you did not dance, we lamented and you did not wail.’ 18 For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say ‘He has a demon’; 19 the Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say ‘Here is a gormandizer and a drinker, a friend of customhouse officers and people of bad character’; and wisdom is justified by her works. " 20 Then he began to reproach the cities in which most of his miracles had been done, because they did not repent: 21 "Woe to you, Chorazin! woe to you, Bethsaida! because if the miracles that have been done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon they would have repented in sackcloth and ashes long ago; 22 I tell you, though, it will be more bearable for Tyre and Sidon at the day of judgment than for you.
23 And you, Capernaum, are you to be lifted up to heaven? you are to go down to the world of the dead, because if the miracles that have been done in you had been done in Sodom it would have lasted till today; 24 I tell you, though, it will be more bearable for Sodom at the day of judgment than for you. "
25 At that time Jesus answered "I give thee praise, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou didst hide these things from the wise and discerning and disclose them to infants; 26 yes, Father, because such was thy pleasure.
27 Everything has been committed to me by my Father; and no one is acquainted with the Son except the Father, nor is anyone acquainted with the Father except the Son and he to whom the Son chooses to disclose him.
28 Come to me, all you toilers, all who are loaded down, and I will give you rest.
29 Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me, because I am meek and lowly in heart; and you shall find rest for your souls.
30 For my yoke is easy, and my load light. "
12:1-50
12 At that time Jesus went through the grainfields on the sabbath.
And his disciples grew hungry and began to pick ears and eat them; 2 and the Pharisees, seeing it, said to him "There, your disciples are doing what it is not lawful to do on a Sabbath. " 3 But he said to them "Have you not read what David did when he and those who were with him were hungry? 4 how he went into the house of God and they ate the showbread, which it was not allowable for him to eat nor for those who were with him, but only for the priests? 5 or have you not read in the law that on the sabbath the priests in the temple profane the sabbath and are guiltless? 6 but I tell you there is something greater than the temple here.
7 But if you knew what ‘I want pity, and not sacrifice’ is, you would not have condemned the guiltless; 8 for the Son of Man is master of the sabbath. "
9 And he passed from that place to their synagogue; 10 and lo, there was a man there with a shriveled hand, and they put the question to him "Is it lawful to cure on the sabbath? " that they might arraign him.
11 But he said to them "What man will there be of you that will have one sheep, and if that falls into a pit on the sabbath will not catch hold of it and get it on its feet? 12 How much more important, then, is a man than a sheep!
So that it is lawful to do a good turn on the sabbath. " 13 Then he said to the man "Stretch out your hand "; and he stretched it out and it was restored, sound like the other.
14 But the Pharisees went out and laid a plot against him to make away with him; 15 but Jesus, finding it out, retired from that place.
And many followed him, and he cured them all, 16 and told them peremptorily not to make him known, 17 that what was said through the prophet Isaiah in the words 18 "Here is my servant whom I like well, my dear one in whom my soul takes pleasure; I will put my Spirit upon him, and he shall announce judgment to the nations.
19 He will not wrangle, nor shout, nor will anyone hear his voice on the streets.
20 He will not break a crushed reed, and will not put out smoldering flax, till he brings judgment out to victory; 21 and in his name shall nations hope " should be fulfilled.
22 Then there was brought to him a blind and dumb demoniac; and he cured him, so that the dumb man spoke and saw.
23 And all the crowds were surprised and said "Can it be that this is the Son of David? " 24 But the Pharisees, hearing it, said "It is simply by Beelzebul the head of the demons that this man expels the demons. " 25 But he, knowing their thoughts, said to them "Any kingdom divided against itself is laid waste, and any city or family divided against itself will not be kept up; 26 and if Satan is expelling Satan, he is divided against himself so how shall his kingdom be kept up? 27 And if it is by Beelzebul that I expel the demons, by whom do your sons expel them? accordingly they shall be your judges.
28 But if I expel the demons by the Spirit of God, then the Reign of God has overtaken you.
29 Or how can one enter a strong man’s house and carry off his goods unless he first binds the strong man? and then he shall plunder his house.
30 He who is not with me is against me, and he who does not gather with me scatters.
31 Accordingly I tell you, men will be forgiven every sin and blasphemy, but not the blasphemy of the Spirit.
32 And anyone who says a thing against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but one who says it against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven either in this or in the future age.
33 Either make the tree good and its fruit good, or make the tree foul and its fruit foul; for the tree is known by the fruit.
34 Spawn of vipers, how can you be bad and speak good? for what the mouth speaks comes out of what is overflowing in the heart.
35 A good man brings out good things from his good stock, and a bad man brings out bad things from his bad stock.
36 But I tell you, every idle word that men shall speak they shall account for at the day of judgment; 37 for you shall be acquitted on your own words and condemned on your own words. "
38 Then some of the scribes and Pharisees answered him "Teacher, we want to see a token from you. " 39 But he answered them "A wicked and adulterous generation is in quest of a token, and will be given none but the token of the prophet Jonah.
40 For as Jonah was in the whale’s belly three days and three nights, so will the Son of Man be in the heart of the earth three days and three nights.
41 The men of Nineveh shall indict this generation and convict it, because they repented at Jonah’s proclamation and now here is more than Jonah.
42 The queen of the south shall indict this generation and convict it, because she came from the ends of the earth to listen to Solomon’s wisdom, and now here is more than Solomon.
43 But when an unclean spirit comes out of a man it goes through waterless tracts looking for a resting-place, and does not find one; 44 then it says ‘I will turn back to my home that I came from,’ and when it gets there it finds it unoccupied, swept and put in order; 45 then it goes and takes with it seven other spirits worse than itself, and they go in and live there, and that man’s last stage comes to be worse than his first.
It will be the same with this wicked generation. "
46 While he was still speaking to the crowds, his mother and brothers made their appearance, standing outside and wanting to speak to him.
47 48 But he replied to the one who told him of it "Who is my mother, and who are my brothers? " 49 and he stretched out his hand toward his disciples and said "Here are my mother and my brothers; 50 for whoever does the will of my Father in heaven, he is my brother and sister and mother. "
13:1-58
13 On that day Jesus went out of the house and sat by the seaside; 2 and great crowds gathered to him, so that he got into a boat and sat in it, and all the crowd stood on the beach; 3 and he spoke much to them in parables, saying "Once upon a time a sower went out to sow.
4 And in his sowing some fell on the roadside, and the birds came and ate it up; 5 and some fell on the rocky ground where it had not much soil, and came up at once because of not having any depth of soil, 6 but was scorched when the sun rose, and dried up because of not having roots; 7 and some fell among the thorns, and the thorns grew up and smothered it; 8 and some fell on the good soil and yielded a crop, one grain a hundred and another sixty and another thirty.
9 Let him who has ears hear! " 10 And the disciples approached and said to him "Why do you speak to them in parables? " 11 and he answered "Because it is given to you to know the secrets of the Reign of Heaven, but it is not given to them.
12 For whoever has, more shall be given to him, and he shall have enough and to spare; but whoever has not, even what he has shall be taken from him.
13 This is why I speak to them in parables, because when they see they do not see, and when they hear they do not hear nor understand; 14 and Isaiah’s prophecy which says ‘Hear you shall, and not understand; and see you shall, and not perceive; 15 for this people’s wits are thickened, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have shut, for fear they should see with their eyes and hear with their ears and understand with their wits, and turn back, and I should heal them’ is fulfilled to them.
16 But happy are your eyes, because they see, and your ears, because they hear; 17 for I tell you verily that many prophets and saints desired to see what you see and to hear what you hear, and did not.
18 Hear then, you, the parable of the sower.
19 When anyone hears the word of the Reign and does not understand it, the Evil One comes and carries off what has been sowed in his heart; this is the one that was sowed on the roadside.
20 And the one who has sowed on the rocky ground, he is the one who hears the word and at once receives it with joy, 21 yet has no root in him but is temporary, and when there comes distress or persecution because of the word he is staggered at once.
22 And the one who was sowed among the thorns, he is the one who hears the word, and temporal anxieties and the deceits of wealth stifle the word and it becomes unfruitful.
23 And the one who was sowed on the good soil, he is the one who hears and understands the word; who bears his crop, and produces one a hundred and another sixty and another thirty. "
24 He set before them another parable, saying "The Reign of Heaven resembles a man who sowed good seed in his field; 25 but while men were asleep his enemy came and sowed darnel in among the wheat, and went off.
26 And when the stalks began to ear and made heads, then the darnel too showed itself; 27 and the proprietor’s servants came and said to him ‘Sir, did you not sow good seed in your field? then how comes it to have darnel?’ 28 And he said to them ‘An enemy did that.’
And the servants say to him ‘Then do you want us to go and pick them out?’ 29 But he says to them ‘No, for fear that in picking out the darnel you should pull up the wheat along with it.
30 Leave both to grow together till harvest; and at harvesttime I will tell the harvesters "Pull out the darnel first and tie it in bundles to burn, but gather the wheat into my barn. "’ "
31 He set before them another parable, saying "The Reign of Heaven is like a grain of mustard which a man took and sowed in his field; 32 which is the smallest of all the seeds, but when it grows it is the largest of the plants and becomes a tree so that the birds of the air come and perch in its branches. "
33 He spoke to them another parable: "The Reign of Heaven is like a bit of yeast which a woman took and buried in forty quarts of flour till it all grew yeasty. "
34 All this Jesus spoke to the crowds in parables, and spoke nothing to them without parable, 35 so that what was said through the prophet in the words "I will open my mouth in parables, I will emit things hidden since the foundation of the world " should be fulfilled.
36 Then he left the crowds and came into the house; and his disciples approached him, saying "Explain the parable of the darnel in the field to us. " 37 And he answered "The one who sowed the good seed is the Son of Man; 38 and the field is the world; and the good seed, that is the men of the Reign, and the darnel is the men of evil; 39 and the enemy that sowed it is the devil; and the harvest is the final time, and the harvesters are angels.
40 As darnel, then, is picked out and burned up, so it will be at the final time: 41 the Son of Man will send out his angels and they will pick out from his kingdom all snares that trip people up, and men that do wickedness, 42 and throw them into the furnace of fire; there will the weeping and the grinding of teeth be.
43 Then will the righteous shine out like the sun in their Father’s reign.
Let him who has ears hear!
44 "The Reign of Heaven is like a treasure hidden in the field, which a man has found and hid, and in his gladness he goes and sells all he has and buys that field.
45 "Again, the Reign of Heaven is like a merchant who is looking for fine pearls, 46 and, having found one very valuable pearl, has gone and sold everything he had and bought it.
47 "Again, the Reign of Heaven is like a seine that is thrown into the sea and gathers all sorts, 48 and when it is filled they draw it up on the beach and sit down and sort the good into tubs, but throw out the foul.
49 So it will be at the final time: the angels will go out and separate the wicked from among the righteous 50 and throw them into the furnace of fire; there will the weeping and the grinding of teeth be.
51 "Have you understood all this? "
They said to him "Yes. "
52 And he said to them "Accordingly, every scribe who has become a disciple of the Reign of Heaven is like a householder who draws out from his stock new things and old things. "
But Jesus said to them "A prophet is not unhonored anywhere but in his hometown and in his house "; 58 and he did not do many miracles there because of their unbelievingness.
Matthew 14:1-36
14 At that time the tetrarch Herod heard the report about Jesus, 2 and said to his servants "This is John the Baptist; he has risen from the dead, and that is why the powers are operating in him. " 3 For Herod had seized John and put him in chains and put him away in prison on account of Herodias his brother Philip’s wife; 4 for John used to tell him "It is not lawful for you to have her "; 5 and, while he wished to kill him, he was afraid of the people, because they regarded him as a prophet.
13 And at hearing it Jesus retired in a boat from there to a lonely place by himself; and the crowds heard of it and followed him by land from the cities, 14 and upon landing he saw a great crowd and had pity on them and cured their sick.
22 And at once he made the disciples get into the boat and go to the other side ahead of him while he dismissed the crowds. 23 And when he had dismissed the crowds he went up on the mountainside by himself to pray.
And when evening came he was there alone; 24 but the boat was now two or three miles away from the land, having a hard time with the waves, for the wind was contrary.
25 But in the fourth watch of the night he came toward them walking on the sea.
26 And the disciples, seeing him walking on the sea, were alarmed, saying "It is an apparition, " and screamed with fear.
27 But at once Jesus spoke to them, saying "All right, it is I, do not be afraid. " 28 And Peter answered him "Sir, if it is you, bid me come to you on the water. " 29 And he said "Come "; and Peter, stepping out of the boat, walked on the water and came toward Jesus.
30 But when he saw the wind he was frightened, and, beginning to sink, cried out "Master, help! " 31 And at once Jesus reached out his hand and took hold of him, and said to him "Little-faith, what did you get uncertain for? " 32 and when they stepped into the boat the wind lulled.
33 And those who were in the boat did him reverence, saying "You certainly are the Son of God. "
34 And when they got across they came to land in Gennesaret; 35 and upon recognizing him the men of that place sent to all that region and brought to him all who were ill, 36 and appealed to him that they might just touch the tassel of his cloak; and as many as touched it were made well.
Matthew
15:1-39
15 Then scribes and Pharisees from Jerusalem approached Jesus saying 2 "Why do your disciples violate the tradition of the elders? for they do not wash their hands when they eat bread. " 3 And he answered them "Why do you too violate the commandment of God because of your tradition? 4 for God said ‘Honor your father and mother’ and ‘Let him who uses bad language to his father or mother suffer death’; 5 but you say ‘Whoever says to his father or mother "Whatever you get any good of from me is dedicated " 6 shall not honor his father or his mother’; and you have nullified God’s word because of your tradition.
7 Hypocrites, well did Isaiah prophesy of you, 8 ‘This people honors me with the lips, but their hearts are remote from me; 9 and they adore me vainly, inculcating teachings that are commands of men.’ " 10 And he called the crowd to him and said to them "Listen and understand: 11 it is not what comes into the mouth that defiles the man, it is just what goes out of the mouth that defiles the man. " 12 Then the disciples came to him and said "Do you know that the Pharisees were staggered when they heard the saying? " 13 And he answered "Every plantation that my Heavenly Father did not set out shall be uprooted.
14 Let them be: they are blind guides of blind men, and if a blind man is guiding a blind man they will both fall into a pit. " 15 But Peter answered him, "Expound the parable to us. " 16 And he said "Are you, too, still unable to see a point? 17 do you not see that anything that goes into the mouth passes into the stomach and is discharged into a latrine? 18 but what goes out of the mouth comes from the heart, and these defile the man.
19 For from the heart come evil designs, murders, adulteries, unchastities, thefts, false testimonies, abusive language: 20 these things are what defile the man; but eating with unwashed hands does not. "
21 And Jesus went out from there and withdrew to the parts about Tyre and Sidon.
22 And lo, a Canaanite woman had come out of that territory and was screaming "Son of David, sir, take pity on me; my daughter is grievously demon-ridden "; 23 but he made no answer to her.
And his disciples approached him and asked him "Send her off, for she is screaming after us "; 24 but he answered "I was not sent to any but the lost sheep of the house of Israel. " 25 And she came and did him reverence, saying "Help me, sir "; 26 but he answered "It is not a good thing to take the children’s bread and throw it to the dogs. " 27 But she said "Yes, sir for the dogs eat of the crumbs that fall from their masters’ table. " 28 Then Jesus answered her "Woman, great is your faith; have it as you will. "
And her daughter was healed from that moment.
29 And Jesus passed from there to the Sea of Galilee, and went up on the mountainside and sat there; 30 and there came to him great crowds having with them cripples, mutilated men, blind men, dumb men, and many others, and threw them down at his feet; and he cured them, 31 so that the crowd wondered at seeing dumb men speaking, mutilated men sound, and cripples walking and blind men seeing, and glorified the God of Israel.
32 But Jesus called his disciples to him and said "I feel for the crowd, because it is now three days they have been staying with me and not had anything to eat; and I do not want to dismiss them fasting, for fear they should grow faint on the road. " 33 And the disciples said to him "Where are we to get so much bread in the wilderness as to give such a crowd their fill? " 34 and Jesus said to them "How much bread have you? " and they said "Seven cakes, and a few little fish. " 35 And he instructed the crowd to take their places on the ground, 36 and took the seven cakes and the fishes, and gave thanks and broke them and gave them to the disciples, and the disciples to the crowds, 37 and they all ate and had their fill; and they took up what was left over of fragments, seven full hampers 38 and it was four thousand men, apart from women and children, that ate.
39 And he dismissed the crowds and got into the boat and came to the territory of Magadan.
16:1-28
16 And the Pharisees and Sadducees came to him and, as a test challenged him to show them a token from heaven; 2 but he answered them 3 4 "A wicked and adulterous generation is in quest of a token, and will be given none but the token of Jonah "; and he left them and went away.
5 And the disciples failed to take bread when they came to the other side; 6 and Jesus said to them "See that you beware of Pharisee and Sadducee yeast. " 7 And they questioned among themselves, saying "We did not take bread. " 8 But Jesus, finding it out, said "Why are you questioning among yourselves, little-faiths, because you have not bread? 9 do you not yet see the point, nor remember the five cakes of bread for the five thousand and how many baskets you got? 10 nor the seven cakes for the four thousand and how many hampers you got? 11 how is it you do not see that I did not speak to you of bread? but beware of Pharisee and Sadducee yeast. " 12 Then they understood that he had not been telling them to beware of yeast of bread, but of Pharisee and Sadducee teaching.
13 And Jesus came into the parts about Caesarea Philippi, and there he asked his disciples "Who do people say the Son of Man is? " 14 and they said "Some John the Baptist, and others Elijah; and others Jeremiah or one of the prophets. " 15 Said he to them, "And who do you say I am? " 16 and Simon Peter answered "You are the Messiah, the son of the living God. " 17 And Jesus answered him "Happy are you, Simon Bar-Jonah; because it was not flesh and blood that disclosed it to you, but my Father in heaven.
18 And I tell you, you are Peter " [in English, "you are a Rock "], "and on this rock I will build my church; and the gates of the realm of death shall not prevail against it.
19 I will give you the keys of the Reign of Heaven, and what you declare unlawful on earth shall be declared unlawful in heaven, and what you declare lawful on earth shall be declared lawful in heaven. " 20 Then he told the disciples peremptorily not to say to anyone that he was the Messiah.
21 Thenceforth Jesus began to show his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer a great deal from the elders and chief priests and scribes and be killed, and rise on the third day.
22 And Peter took him in hand and began to rebuke him, saying "Away with the thought, sir; this shall not happen to you. " 23 But he turned and said to Peter "Go behind me, Satan; you are my snare, because you do not have God’s ideas but men’s. "
24 Then Jesus said to his disciples "If anyone wishes to come after me, let him disown himself and take up his cross and follow me.
25 For whoever wishes to save his self will lose it, but whoever loses his self on my account will find it.
26 For what good will a man get if he makes a profit of the whole world and a loss of his self? or what shall a man give as an equivalent for his self? 27 For the Son of Man is to come in his Father’s glory with his angels, and will then repay each one according to his actions.
28 I tell you verily there are some of those who stand here who shall not taste death till they see the Son of Man coming in his royal reign. "
Matthew 17:1-27
17 And after six days Jesus took Peter and James and his brother John and brought them up on the side of a high mountain by themselves, 2 and was transfigured before them; and his face shone like the sun, and his clothes became white as light.
3 And lo, there appeared to them Moses and Elijah talking with him.
4 But Peter answered by saying to Jesus "Sir, it is a good thing we are here: if you wish, I will make three booths here, one for you and one for Moses and one for Elijah. " 5 While he was still speaking, lo, a luminous cloud overshadowed them; and lo, out of the cloud there was a voice saying "This is my dear son in whom I take pleasure; listen to him "; 6 and at hearing it the disciples threw themselves down on their faces and were greatly afraid.
7 And Jesus came up to them and touched them and said "Rise, and do not be afraid "; 8 and, raising their eyes, they saw nobody but only Jesus himself.
9 And as they were coming down from the mountain Jesus gave them the injunction "Do not tell the vision to anybody till the Son of Man has risen from the dead. " 10 And his disciples put the question to him "Why is it, then, that the scribes say Elijah must come first? " 11 and he answered "O, Elijah is to come and restore everything; 12 but I tell you Elijah has come already, and they did not recognize him but did with him whatever they wished; so will the Son of Man too suffer at their hands. " 13 Then the disciples understood that he had been speaking to them of John the Baptist.
14 And when they got to the crowd a man came up to him kneeling to him and saying 15 "Sir, take pity on my son, because he has the epilepsy and is in a bad way; for he often falls into the fire and often into the water; 16 and I brought him to your disciples and they could not cure him. " 17 And Jesus answered "O unbelieving and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I bear with you?
Bring him here for me. " 18 And Jesus gave him a peremptory order, and the demon came out of him, and the boy was cured from that moment.
19 Then the disciples approached Jesus when they were by themselves and said "Why was it we could not expel it? " 20 And he said to them "Because of your little faith; for I tell you verily, if you have faith like a grain of mustard seed you will say to this mountain ‘Pass from here to there’ and it will; and nothing will be impossible to you. " 21
22 And as a body of them were getting together in Galilee, Jesus said to them "The Son of Man is to be given over into the hands of men, 23 and they will kill him, and the third day he will rise "; and they took it very hard.
24 And upon their coming to Capernaum the men who took the half-shekels came to Peter and said "Does your teacher not pay half-shekels? " 25 He said "Yes. "
And when he came into the house Jesus spoke first to him, saying "What do you think, Simon? from whom do the kings of the earth take duties or poll-tax, from their sons or from strangers? " 26 And when he said "From strangers, " Jesus said to him "Hence the sons are free.
27 But in order that we may not stagger them, go to the sea and throw in a hook; and take the first fish that comes up, and by opening its mouth you will find a shekel.
Take that and give it to them for me and you. "
18:1-35
18 At that same time the disciples came to Jesus, saying "Who then is greatest in the Reign of Heaven? " 2 And he called a child to him and set it in the middle among them, 3 and said "I tell you verily, if you do not turn and become like the children you shall not get into the Reign of Heaven.
4 So whoever makes himself small like this child, he is greatest in the Reign of Heaven.
5 And anybody who receives one such child in my name is receiving me; 6 but anybody who trips up one of these little ones who believe in me, it would be well for him that an ass-power millstone should be hung around his neck and that he should be sunk in the sea far from land.
7 Woe to the world for trippings-up! for the trippings-up have to come, yet woe to the man through whom the tripping-up comes.
8 And if your hand or your foot is tripping you up, cut it away and throw it from you; it is a better thing for you to pass into life one-armed or a cripple than to be thrown into the eternal fire with two hands or two feet.
9 And if your eye is tripping you up, take it out and throw it from you; it is a better thing for you to pass into life one-eyed than to be thrown into the hell of fire with two eyes.
10 "See that you do not despise one of these little ones; for I tell you that in heaven their angels continually see the face of my Father in heaven.
11 12 What do you think? if some man has a hundred sheep and one of them strays, will he not leave the ninety-nine on the mountains and go looking for the stray? 13 and if he does find it, I tell you verily he is gladder of it than of the ninety-nine that did not stray. 14 Just so it is no will of my Father in heaven that one of these little ones should be lost.
15 "But if your brother sins, go bring it home to him between you and him alone.
If he listens to you, you have gained your brother.
18 I tell you verily, such things as you declare unlawful on earth shall be declared unlawful in heaven, and such things as you declare lawful on earth shall be declared lawful in heaven.
19 Again, I tell you verily that if on earth two of you agree about anything that they ask for, they shall have it from my Father in heaven.
20 For where two or three are met in my name, there am I among them. "
21 Then Peter came to him and said to him "Sir, how many times shall my brother sin against me and I forgive him? up to seven times? " 22 Jesus said to him "I do not tell you ‘up to seven times,’ but up to seventy-seven times.
23 For this reason the Reign of Heaven resembles a king who wanted to have an accounting with his servants; 24 and when he began his accounting there was one brought to him who was debtor to the amount of ten thousand talents; 25 and, he not being able to pay, his master gave orders that he be sold, and his wife and his children and everything that he had, and that payment be made.
26 So the servant threw himself down and did him reverence, saying ‘Have patience with me and I will pay you everything.’ 27 And that servant’s master was moved to pity, and set him at liberty and released him from the loan.
31 So when his fellow-servants saw what happened they were greatly grieved, and came and informed their master of all that had happened.
35 So will my heavenly Father also do to you if you do not each forgive your brother from your heart. " Matthew 19:1-30
19 And when Jesus had finished these words he took his departure from Galilee and came into the Jewish territory on the other side of the Jordan; 2 and great crowds followed him, and he cured them there.
So let not a man part what God has joined. " 7 They said to him "Then why did Moses command that one should give her a certificate of separation and divorce her? " 8 He said to them "Because in view of your obduracy Moses did permit you to divorce your wives; but from the first it has not been so.
9 But I tell you that whoever divorces his wife, not for unchastity, and marries another, commits adultery. "
10 The disciples said to him "If a man’s predicament with his wife is like that, it is not well to marry. " 11 But he said to them "Not all can live up to those words, but they to whom it is given.
12 For there are eunuchs who were originally born so, and there are eunuchs who were made such by men, and there are eunuchs who have made themselves such on account of the Reign of Heaven. Let him live up to it who can. "
13 Then there were brought to him children to have him lay his hands on them and pray; but the disciples rebuked them.
14 But Jesus said "Let the children alone, and do not interfere with their coming to me, for to such belongs the Reign of Heaven. " 15 And he laid his hands on them, and went on his way.
16 And there came one to him and said "Teacher, what good thing shall I do to have eternal life? " 17 And he said to him "Why do you ask me about the good?
One is the Good.
But if you want to pass into life, keep the commandments. " 18 He said to him "Which? "
And Jesus said "‘You shall not murder,’ ‘You shall not commit adultery,’ ‘You shall not steal,’ ‘You shall not give false testimony,’ 19 ‘Honor your father and mother,’ and ‘You shall love your neighbor as yourself.’ " 20 The young man said to him "I have kept all these; what am I still deficient in? " 21 Jesus said to him "If you want to be thorough, go; sell everything you have and give the money to poor men, and you shall have a fund laid by in heaven; and come and follow me. " 22 But at hearing the words the young man went away grieving; for he owned great possessions.
23 And Jesus said to his disciples "I tell you verily that a rich man will have hard work to get into the Reign of Heaven.
24 And I tell you again: it is easier for a camel to get through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to get into the Reign of God. " 25 And at hearing it the disciples showed great astonishment, saying "Then who can be saved? " 26 but Jesus looked at them and said "With men this is impossible, but with God everything is possible. " 27 Then Peter answered him "We here did leave everything and followed you; then what shall we have? " 28 And Jesus said to them "I tell you verily that you who have followed me shall at the rebirth, when the Son of Man sits on his throne of glory, sit on twelve thrones yourselves, judging the twelve tribes of Israel; 29 and everyone who has left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or children or lands on account of my name shall receive many times as much, and shall inherit eternal life.
30 But many of the first will be last, and of the last first.
Matthew
20:1-34
20 "For the Reign of Heaven is like a proprietor who went out at six in the morning to hire laborers for his vineyard.
2 And he agreed with the laborers on a denarius a day and sent them to his vineyard.
3 And he went out at about nine o’clock and saw others standing idle in the marketplace, 4 and said to those ‘Go to the vineyard too, and I will give you what is right’; and they went.
5 And he went out again about twelve and three o’clock and did the same way.
6 And about five o’clock he went out and found others standing there, and said to them ‘Why are you standing idle here all day?’ 7 They said to him ‘Because nobody has hired us.’
He said to them ‘Go to the vineyard too.’ 8 And when evening came the owner of the vineyard said to his superintendent ‘Call the laborers and pay the wages, beginning with the last and going on to the first.’ 9 And the five o’clock ones came and got a denarius each; 10 and the first came and supposed they would get more, and they too got the denarius each.
11 And when they got it they grumbled at the proprietor, 12 saying ‘These last did one hour, and you made them equal to us that bore the weight of the day and the scorching wind.’ 13 But he answered one of them ‘Comrade, I am not wronging you: did you not agree with me for a denarius? 14 take up your money and go, but I choose to give the same to this last one as to you.
15 Is it not my right to do what I choose with my own things? or do you grudge because I am liberal?’ 16 Thus the last shall be first and the first last. "
17 And when Jesus was about to go up to Jerusalem he took the twelve with him by themselves, and said to them on the road 18 "Here we are going up to Jerusalem; and the Son of Man will be put into the hands of the chief priests and scribes, and they will condemn him to death 19 and hand him over to the foreigners to outrage and flog and crucify, and on the third day he will rise. "
20 Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee came to him with her sons, doing him reverence and asking something of him.
21 And he said to her "What do you want? "
Said she to him, "Say that these two sons of mine shall sit one on your right and one on your left in your reign. " 22 But Jesus answered "You do not know what you are asking for.
Can you drink the cup that I am going to drink? "
Said they to him, "We can. " 23 Said he to them, "Drink my cup you shall; but as to sitting on my right and on my left, this is not mine to give, but belongs to those for whom it has been prepared by my Father. "
24 And at hearing of it the ten were offended with the two brothers; 25 but Jesus called them to him and said "You know that the rulers of the nations lord it over them and their great men domineer over them. 26 It is not so among you, but anyone who wishes to be great among you shall be your serving-man, 27 and anyone who wishes to be first among you shall be your slave, 28 just as the Son of Man did not come to be waited on but to wait on the needs of others, and to give his life as ransom for many. "
29 And as they were going out of Jericho a great crowd followed him; 30 and lo, two blind men sitting by the roadside, hearing that Jesus was passing by, cried out "Son of David, sir, take pity on us! " 31 but the crowd rebuked them, telling them to be still.
21:1-46
3 And if anyone says anything to you, you are to say ‘The Lord needs them,’ and he will send them at once.
4 And this has come to pass in order that what was said through the prophet in the words 5 ‘Say to the daughter of Sion "Here is your king coming to you, meek, and mounted on an ass, and on a colt an ass’s foal "’ should be fulfilled. " 6 And the disciples went and did as Jesus directed them 7 and brought the ass and the colt; and they laid their cloaks on them, and he took his seat upon them; 8 and the great crowd spread their cloaks in the road, and others were cutting branches from the trees and spreading them in the road.
9 And the crowds that went ahead of him and that followed were crying out "Hosanna to the Son of David; blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord; hosanna on high! " 10 And when he came into Jerusalem all the city was shaken, saying "Who is this? " 11 and the crowds said "This is the prophet Jesus from Nazareth in Galilee. "
12 And Jesus went into the temple-precinct and turned out all those who were buying and selling in the precinct, and threw down the money-changers’ tables and the pigeon-sellers’ seats, 13 and said to them "It is written ‘My house shall be called a house of prayer,’ but you are making it a robbers’ cave. " 14 And blind and lame men approached him in the precinct, and he cured them.
15 But at seeing the marvels that he did, and the children shouting "Hosanna to the Son of David " in the temple-precinct, the chief priests and the scribes took offense 16 and said to him "Do you hear what these are saying? "
And Jesus said to them "Yes; did you never read ‘Out of the mouths of infants, and of babies at the breast, thou hast instituted praise’? " 17 And he left them and went out of the city to Bethany and spent the night there.
18 And in the morning, as he was on his way back to the city, he grew hungry; 19 and, seeing a single fig-tree by the roadside, he went to it, and found nothing on it but only leaves, and said to it "Never again shall there be any fruit from you "; and the fig-tree withered immediately.
20 And at seeing it the disciples wondered, saying "How was it that immediately the fig-tree withered? " 21 But Jesus answered them "I tell you verily, if you have faith and do not doubt you will not only do this of the fig-tree, but even if you say to this mountain ‘Be lifted up and thrown into the sea’ it will be done; 22 and everything that you ask for in prayer, believing, you will receive. "
23 And after he had come into the temple-precinct the chief priests and the elders of the people approached him as he was teaching and said "By what authority are you doing these things? and who gave you this authority? " 24 But Jesus answered them "I will ask you one thing myself, and if you tell me that, so will I tell you by what authority I am doing these things.
25 Where was John’s baptizing from? from heaven or from men? "
And they went over the question to themselves, thinking "If we say ‘From heaven’ he will say to us ‘Then why did you not believe him?’ 26 but if we say ‘From men’ we are afraid of the populace, for they all look on John as a prophet. " 27 And they answered Jesus "We do not know. "
Said he in turn to them, "And neither do I tell you by what authority I am doing these things.
28 But what do you think? A man had two children.
He went to the first and said ‘My child, go today and work in the vineyard’; 29 but he answered ‘I’ll be there, sir’ and did not go. 30 And he went to the second and said the same; but he answered ‘I don’t want to.’
Afterward he changed his mind and went. 31 Which of the two did what his father would have him? "
32 For John came to you along the road to right living and you did not believe him, but the customhouse officers and prostitutes did; and you, when you saw it, did not even afterward change your mind and believe him.
33 "Listen to another parable.
There was a proprietor who set out a vineyard, and put a fence round it and dug a winepress in it and built a tower, and rented it to farmers and went abroad.
34 And when the season for the crop drew near he sent his servants to the farmers to receive his crop; 35 and the farmers took his servants and beat this one and killed that and stoned that.
36 Again he sent other servants, more numerous than the first; and they did the same way with them.
40 Then when the owner of the vineyard comes what will he do with those farmers? "
41 They said to him "He will kill them off like the rascals they are, and rent the vineyard to other farmers who will deliver him the crops in their seasons. "
42 Said Jesus to them "Did you never read in the Scriptures ‘The stone that the builders condemned, that stone has come to be the top of the corner: this was from the Lord, and is wonderful in our eyes’? 43 I tell you accordingly, the Reign of God will be taken away from you and given to a nation that produces its fruits. " 44
45 And the chief priests and the Pharisees, hearing his parables, knew that he was speaking about them; 46 and they tried to seize him but were afraid of the crowds, since they looked upon him as a prophet. Matthew
22:1-46 22 And Jesus again answered them in parables, saying 2 "The Reign of Heaven resembles a king who made a wedding-feast for his son, 3 and sent his servants to call those who had been invited to the feast, and they would not come.
11 But the king came in to view the feasters, and saw there a man who did not have on a wedding garment, 12 and said to him ‘Comrade, how is it you have come in here without a wedding garment?’ and he was speechless. 13 Then the king said to the attendants ‘Tie him hand and foot and put him out into the outer darkness.’
There will the weeping and the grinding of teeth be.
14 For there are many that are called but few that are chosen. "
15 Then the Pharisees went and laid a plot for entrapping him in talk; 16 and they sent him their disciples with the Herodians to say "Teacher, we know that you are truthful and teach the way of God in truth, and care for nobody, for you do not look at men’s faces; 17 so tell us what you think: is paying taxes to Caesar lawful or not? " 18 But Jesus, discovering their rascality, said "Why are you trying tricks on me, you hypocrites? 19 show me the coin for the taxes. "
And they brought him a denarius.
20 And he said to them "Whose is this portrait and this inscription? " 21 They say "Caesar’s. "
Then he said to them "Then pay what is Caesar’s to Caesar and what is God’s to God. " 22 And at hearing it they wondered, and left him and went away.
23 On that day Sadducees (people who say there is no such thing as a resurrection) approached him and put the question to him 24 "Teacher, Moses said ‘If one dies without children, his brother shall marry his widow and set up a posterity for his brother.’ 25 But among us there were seven brothers, and the first married and passed away, and, not having issue, left his wife to his brother; 26 and similarly the second and the third, and so on down to the seventh.
27 And last of all the woman died.
28 So at the resurrection which of the seven will she be the wife of? for all of them had her. " 29 But Jesus answered them "You go wrong by not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God: 30 for in the resurrection they do not marry but are like angels in heaven.
31 But as to the resurrection of the dead have you not read what was said to you by God in the words 32 ‘I am the God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob’?
He is not the God of dead men but of living men. " 33 And upon hearing it the crowds were astonished at his teaching.
34 But, hearing that he had silenced the Sadducees, the Pharisees gathered together, 35 and one of them, a lawyer, put the question to him to test him, 36 "Teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the law? " 37 And he said to him "‘You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind,’ 38 this is the greatest commandment, the first.
39 A second like it is this, ‘You shall love your neighbor as yourself.’ 40 On these two commandments hangs all the law and the prophets. "
41 And while the Pharisees were gathered Jesus put the question to them 42 "What do you think about the Messiah? whose son is he to be? "
They said to him "David’s. " 43 He said to them "How is it then that David in the Spirit calls him lord, in the words 44 ‘The Lord said to my lord "Sit at my right hand till I put your enemies underneath your feet "’? 45 if then David calls him lord, how is he to be his son? " 46 And nobody could give him any answer, and from that day on no one any longer dared to put any question to him.
23:1-39
23 Then Jesus spoke to the crowds and his disciples, saying 2 "The scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses’s seat; 3 so do and observe everything that they tell you; but do not imitate their deeds, for they say things and do not do them.
4 And they pack heavy loads and lay them on men’s shoulders, but will not move them with a finger themselves.
5 And all their moral acts they do with an eye to being viewed by men; for they make their phylacteries broad and their tassels long.
6 And they are fond of the first place at dinners and the first seats in synagogues, 7 and greetings in the marketplaces, and being called ‘Rabbi’ by men.
8 But do not you be called ‘Rabbi,’ for one is your teacher and you are all of you brothers; 9 and do not call one your father on earth, for one, the heavenly, is your Father.
10 And do not be called spiritual directors either; for one, the Messiah, is your spiritual director.
11 But the greatest one of you shall be serving-man to you.
12 And whoever shall lift himself up will be put down, and whoever shall put himself down will be lifted up.
13 "But woe to you, hypocrite scribes and Pharisees, because you lock the Reign of Heaven in men’s faces; for you do not go in yourselves and neither do you let those go in who are going in.
26 Blind Pharisee, clean the inside of the cup first, that the outside of it too may come to be clean.
39 For I tell you, you shall not see me henceforth until you say ‘Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.’ " Matthew 24:1-51
24 And Jesus came out from the temple-precinct and was going on his way; and his disciples came up to show him the architecture of the precinct.
2 And he answered them "You see all this, do you not?
I tell you verily, there shall not be one stone left upon another here that shall not be torn down. "
3 And as he was sitting on the Mount of Olives the disciples came to him by themselves, saying "Tell us when this will be, and what will be the sign of your coming and of the final time. "
4 And Jesus answered them "Look out that no one deludes you.
5 For many will come under my name, saying ‘I am the Messiah,’ and delude many.
6 And you are going to hear of wars and rumors of wars; see that you are not disquieted; for they have to come, but it is not yet the end.
7 For nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be famines and earthquakes in one place and another; 8 but all this is the beginning of the birth-pangs.
9 Then they will have you arrested and cruelly treated, and will kill you, and you will be hated by all the nations because of my name.
22 And if those days had not been cut short no flesh would have come safe through; but because of the chosen those days will be cut short.
23 Then if anybody says to you ‘here is the Messiah at this place or this’ do not believe it; 24 for there will arise pretended Messiahs and pretended prophets, and they will exhibit great tokens and wonders, so as to delude even the chosen if possible; 25 now I have told you beforehand.
26 So if they say to you ‘here he is, in the wilderness,’ do not go out; ‘here he is, in the closets,’ do not believe it; 27 for as the lightning comes out of the eastern horizon and shines to the western, so shall be the coming of the Son of Man; 28 wherever the carcass is, there the vultures will gather.
32 But learn from the fig-tree this parable: when its twigs come to be tender and put out their leaves you know that the summer is near; 33 so you too, when you see all this, are to know that he is near, at the doors.
34 I tell you verily that this generation shall not pass away till all this has taken place.
35 The heavens and the earth shall pass away, but my words shall not.
36 But as to that day and hour nobody knows, not even the angels of heaven nor the Son, but the Father alone.
37 For as were the days of Noah, so will the coming of the Son of Man be.
38 For as in those days before the flood they ate and drank, married and got their children married, till the day that Noah went into the ark, 39 and before they knew it the flood came and carried off one and all, so shall be also the coming of the Son of Man.
40 Then there will be two men in the field, one is taken along and one is left; 41 two women grinding at the mill, one is taken along and one is left.
42 "So keep awake, because you do not know on what day your Master is coming.
43 But be sure of this, that if the man of the house had known at what time of the night the thief was coming he would have kept awake and not allowed his house to be broken into.
44 Accordingly be ready yourselves, because it will be at the moment when you are not thinking of it that the Son of Man comes.
45 Who, then, is the faithful and intelligent servant whom the master has set over his household to give them their food at the right time? 46 Happy is that servant whom his master, when he comes, shall find doing thus: 47 I tell you verily he will set him over all his property.
48 But if that worthless servant says to himself ‘My master is staying late’ 49 and begins to beat his fellowservants and eats and drinks with the drunken, 50 that servant’s master will come on a day when he does not expect it and at an hour that he does not know, 51 and will cut him in two and allot him a part among the hypocrites: there will the weeping and the grinding of teeth be.
Matthew 25:1-46
25 "Then the Reign of Heaven will resemble ten maidens who took their torches and went out to meet a bridegroom. 2 And five of them were foolish and five sensible; 3 for the foolish ones did not take oil with them when they took their torches, 4 but the sensible took oil in pitchers with their torches.
5 And as the bridegroom was long in coming they all grew drowsy and fell asleep.
6 But at midnight there came a shout ‘Here is the bridegroom! come out to meet him!’ 7 Then all those maidens woke up and put their torches in order.
8 And the foolish ones said to the sensible ones ‘Give us some of your oil, because our torches are going out’; 9 but the sensible ones answered ‘It might not be sufficient for us and you both; better go to those who have it to sell and buy yourselves some.’ 10 But while they were away buying, the bridegroom came, and the ones who were ready went in with him to the wedding, and the door was shut.
11 And afterward the rest of the maidens also came saying ‘Sir, sir, open to us.’ 12 But he answered ‘I tell you verily, I do not know you.’ 13 So keep awake, because you do not know the day nor the hour.
14 "For it is as when a man who was going abroad called his servants and handed over his property to them 15 and gave to one five talents, to another two, to another one, to each according to his individual ability, and went away.
16 At once the one who had received the five talents went and set up a business with them and made five more; 17 similarly the one who had received the two made two more; 18 but the one who had received the one went off and dug in the ground and hid his master’s money.
28 So take the talent away from him and give it to the one with the ten talents; 29 for everyone who has shall have more given to him, and shall have enough and to spare, but from him who has not there shall be taken away even what he has.
30 And put out the inefficient servant into the outside darkness; there will the’ weeping and the grinding of teeth be.’
6 And when Jesus was in Bethany at the house of Simon the leper, 7 a woman with an alabaster vial of high-priced perfume approached him and poured it on his head while he was at the table.
8 And the disciples took offense at the sight, saying "Why this waste? 9 for this could have been sold for a good deal and given to poor people. " 10 And Jesus, finding it out, said to them "Why are you worrying the woman? for she has done a good deed to me; 11 for you always have the poor with you, but me you do not always have.
12 For she, in putting this perfume on my body, has done this toward burying me.
21 And while they were eating he said "I tell you verily that one of you will have me arrested. " 22 And, greatly pained, they began each one to say to him "Am I the one, sir? " 23 And he answered "He who dipped his hand in the dish with me, he will have me arrested.
24 The Son of Man goes as is written of him; but woe to that man through whom the Son of Man is put under arrest! it would have been well for that man if he had not been born. " 25 And Judas, who was to have him arrested, answered him "Am I the one, Rabbi? " He said to him "As you say. "
26 And while they were eating Jesus took a cake of bread, and spoke the blessing and broke it, and, giving it to the disciples, said "Take this and eat it; this is my body. " 27 And he took a cup and gave thanks over it and gave it to them, saying "Drink of it, all of you; 28 for this is my covenant blood poured out for many to the pardoning of sins.
29 But I tell you, henceforth I will not drink of this produce of the vine till that day when I drink it new in my Father’s reign with you. "
30 And they sang a hymn and went out to the Mount of Olives.
31 Then Jesus said to them "You will be staggered over me this night all of you; for it is written ‘I will strike down the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will scatter’; 32 but after my rising I will go ahead of you to Galilee. " 33 But Peter answered him "If everybody will be staggered over you, I never will be staggered. " 34 Jesus said to him "I tell you verily that this night, before a cock has crowed, you will disown me three times. " 35 Said Peter to him "Even if I have to die with you I will not disown you "; and so said all the disciples.
36 Then Jesus came with them to an enclosure known as Gethsemane, and said to the disciples "Sit here while I go there and pray. " 37 And he took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to be unhappy and uneasy; 38 then he said to them "My soul is sad, deathly sad; stay here and keep awake with me "; 39 and he went a little further and threw himself down on his face praying "Father, if it is possible let this cup pass away from me; yet not as I will but as you will. " 40 And he came to the disciples and found them asleep, and said to Peter "Were you so unable to keep awake with me one moment? 41 Keep awake and pray, that you may not fall under temptation: the spirit is enthusiastic but the flesh is weak. " 42 Again he went away for the second time and prayed "Father, if this cannot pass away without my drinking it, your will be done. " 43 And he came and found them asleep again, for their eyes were heavy.
44 And he left them and went away again and prayed for the third time, saying the same words again.
45 Then he came to the disciples and said to them "Well, then, sleep and rest; the moment is close at hand, and the Son of Man is to be given up into the hands of sinners 46 rise, let us be going; here is the one who gives me up to them, close at hand. "
47 And while he was still speaking, in came Judas, one of the twelve, and with him a great crowd with swords and sticks from the chief priests and elders of the people.
48 And the one who was giving him up had given them a sign, telling them "Whichever I kiss is he; take him. " 49 And at once he went up to Jesus and said "Good evening, Rabbi, " and went to kissing him.
50 But Jesus said to him "What you are here for, comrade! "
Then they came up and put their hands on him and took him.
51 And lo, one of those who were with Jesus reached and drew his sword and hit the high priest’s servant and took off his ear.
52 Then Jesus said to him "Put your sword back in its place; for all who take the sword will perish by the sword.
53 Or do you think I cannot appeal to my Father and have him furnish me more than twelve brigades of angels now? 54 so how are the Scriptures to be fulfilled, that it must be this way? " 55 At the same time Jesus said to the crowds "You come out as if it were against a robber, with swords and sticks, to arrest me; I had been sitting in the temple-precinct day by day teaching, and you did not take me.
56 But this has all of it come about in order that the scriptures of the prophets should be fulfilled. "
Then all the disciples left him and ran.
57 And those who had taken Jesus brought him to the house of Caiaphas the high priest, where the scribes and the elders had met.
58 And Peter followed him at a distance up to the high priest’s courtyard, and went inside and sat with the officers to see the end.
59 And the chief priests and the whole Sanhedrin were looking for false testimony against Jesus so that they might put him to death; 60 and they did not find any, though many false witnesses came forward.
But in the end two came forward 61 and said "This man said ‘I can tear down the temple of God and build it up in three days.’ " 62 And the high priest stood up and said to him "Do you make no answer? what is it that these are testifying against you? " 63 but Jesus was silent.
And the high priest said to him "I adjure you by the living God to tell us whether you are the Messiah, the Son of God. " 64 Jesus said to him "As you say; I tell you, though, henceforth it will be sitting at the right hand of Power and coming on the clouds of the heavens that you see the Son of Man. " 65 Then the high priest tore his clothes, saying "He has blasphemed! what further need have we of witnesses? here, you have heard the blasphemy now, 66 what do you think? " And they answered "It is a case for death. "
67 Then they spat into his face and struck him with their fists, and some slapped him 68 saying "Prophesy for us, Messiah, who was it that hit you? "
69 But Peter was sitting out in the courtyard; and one maid came up to him, saying "You were with Jesus the Galilean too "; 70 but he denied it before everybody, saying "I do not know what you are talking about. " 71 And he went out to the porch; and there another girl saw him and said to those who were there "That man was with Jesus the Nazarene "; 72 and again he denied it with an oath, "I do not know the man, " 73 And after a little those who were standing around came up and said to Peter "You positively are one of them yourself your language betrays you. " 74 Then he began to curse and swear that he "did not know the man "; and at once a cock crowed; 75 and Peter remembered Jesus’s word, how he had said "Before a cock has crowed you will disown me three times "; and he went outside and wept bitterly. Matthew 27:1-66
27 And when morning came all the chief priests and the elders of the people laid their plan against Jesus for putting him to death, 2 and bound him and took him to Pilate, the governor, and handed him over to him.
3 Then, upon seeing that he had been condemned, Judas who had been the agent in his arrest regretted his action and brought back the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders, 4 saying "I have sinned in bringing innocent blood to its death. "
But they said "What concern of ours is that? you see to that. " 5 And he threw the pieces into the temple and withdrew, and went away and hanged himself.
6 But the chief priests took the money and said "It is not lawful to deposit it in the temple treasury, because it is the price of blood "; 7 and they decided on buying the potter’s field with it for a burying-ground for strangers, and did so; 8 for which reason that field has been called the Blood Field to this day.
9 Then what was said through the prophet Jeremiah in the words "And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of the Priced whom they priced on the part of the sons of Israel, 10 and gave them for the potter’s field, in accordance with what the Lord directed me, " was fulfilled.
11 But Jesus was set before the governor; and the governor put the question to him "Are you the ‘king of the Jews’? " and Jesus said "As you say. " 12 And while the accusations were being made against him by the chief priests and elders he made no answer.
13 Then Pilate said to him "Do you not hear how many charges against you they are testifying to? " 14 And to not one word of it did he give him an answer, so that the governor wondered exceedingly.
15 And every feast-time it was the governor’s custom to release for the crowd one prisoner whom they wanted.
16 And they had then a conspicuous prisoner known as Jesus Bar-Abbas.
They all said "Have him crucified. " 23 Said he, "Why, what harm has he done? " but they screamed more and more "Have him crucified. " 24 And Pilate, seeing that he was doing no good but rather a disturbance was beginning, took water and washed his hands in front of the people, saying "I am innocent of this blood; you shall see to it. " 25 And all the people answered "His blood be on us and on our children. " 26 Then he released Bar-Abbas for them, but scourged Jesus and gave him in charge to be crucified.
27 Then the governor’s soldiers took Jesus into the praetorium and got together the whole cohort over him, 28 and stripped him and threw a scarlet cape over him, 29 and braided a wreath out of thorns and put it on his head and a reed in his right hand, and knelt before him and made fun of him, saying "Hail, King of the Jews! " 30 and spat on him and took the reed and beat him over the head.
31 And when they had had their fun with him they took the cape off him and put his own clothes on him, and led him away to be crucified.
32 And as they were going out they found a Cyrene man, by name Simon: this man they requisitioned to take up his cross.
He is the King of Israel: let him get down off the cross now, and we will believe on him.
45 And from twelve o’clock on there came a darkness over all the land till three.
54 And when the centurion and those who were with him keeping watch over Jesus saw the earthquake and the rest, they were greatly afraid, saying "This positively was the son of God. "
57 And when evening came there came a rich man from Arimathea, Joseph by name, who had himself become a disciple of Jesus; 58 this man went to Pilate and asked for Jesus’s body.
Then Pilate ordered it turned over to him.
61 And Mary the Magdalene and the other Mary were there, sitting opposite the front of the grave.
28:1-20
28 But at the close of the sabbath, in the twilight of the first day of the week, Mary the Magdalene and the other Mary came to look over the grave; 2 and lo, there came a great earthquake, for an angel of the Lord came down out of the sky and went to the stone and rolled it away and sat on it.
3 And his aspect was like lightning, and his dress white as snow; 4 and in their fear of him the watchers shook and became like dead men. 5 And the angel answered the women "Do not you be afraid; for I know you are looking for Jesus, the one who was crucified.
6 He is not here, for he has risen, as he said he would.
Come and see the place where he lay, 7 and go quickly and tell his disciples ‘He has risen from the dead, and lo, he is going ahead of you to Galilee; there you shall see him.’
Lo, I have told you. " 8 And they went quickly away from the tomb with fear and great joy, and ran to report it to his disciples; 9 and lo, Jesus met them, saying "Good morning. "
And they came up and grasped his feet and did him reverence.
10 Then Jesus said to them "Do not be afraid: go carry word to my brothers to go to Galilee, and there they shall see me. "
11 But while they were on their way, in came some of the guard to the city and reported to the chief priests the whole of what had taken place.
12 And they held a conference with the elders and decided on a policy, and gave the soldiers a considerable quantity of money, 13 telling them "Say ‘His disciples came in the night and stole him away while we were sleeping’; 14 and if this comes to a hearing before the governor we will see him and make everything all right for you. " 15 And they took money and did as they were instructed, and this story was spread among the Jews to this day.
16 But the eleven disciples went to Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus made the appointment for them; 17 and when they saw him they did him reverence, but some hesitated.
18 And Jesus approached them and spoke to them, saying "I have been given all authority in heaven and on earth: 19 so go and make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them into the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, 20 teaching them to keep everything that I commanded you; and I am with you all the days to the end of time. " Mark 1:1-45
1 Here begins the Gospel of God’s son Jesus Christ.
2 As it is written in the prophet Isaiah "Lo, I am sending before your face my messenger who shall prepare your road.
3 The voice of one calling out in the wilderness ‘Get ready the Lord’s road, make his thoroughfare straight!’ " 4 there came John, who baptized in the wilderness, proclaiming baptism for repentance to the pardoning of sins; 5 and all Judea, and all the Jerusalemites, were going out to him and having themselves baptized by him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins.
6 And John wore camel-hair and a leather belt around his waist, and fed on grasshoppers and wild honey; 7 and he proclaimed "He who is stronger than I is coming behind me, he whose shoestring I am not fit to stoop down and untie.
8 I have baptized you with water, but he will baptize you with Holy Spirit. "
9 And in those days Jesus came from Nazareth in Galilee and was baptized in the Jordan by John.
14 And after John was committed to prison Jesus came to Galilee proclaiming the gospel of God 15 and saying "The time has fully come, and the Reign of God is almost here; repent and believe in the gospel. " 16 And in passing along by the Sea of Galilee he saw Simon and Simon’s brother Andrew fishing in the sea with casting-nets; for they were fishermen.
17 And Jesus said to them "Come here after me, and I will cause you to become fishers of men "; 18 and at once they left their nets and followed him.
19 And he went on a little and saw James the son of Zebedee and his brother John, also in their boat putting their nets to rights; 20 and at once he called them, and they left their father Zebedee in the boat with the hired men and went after him.
21 And they go to Capernaum; and at once on the sabbath he had gone into the synagogue and was teaching, 22 and they were astonished at his teaching; for he taught them as having authority, and not as did the scribes.
23 And at once there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit, and he screamed out 24 "What have you to do with us, Jesus, you Nazarene? have you come to destroy us?
I know you, I know who you are, the Holy One of God. " 25 And Jesus rebuked him, saying "Silence, and come out of him. " 26 And, after convulsing him and making a loud outcry, the unclean spirit came out of him.
27 And they were amazed one and all, so that they debated it, saying "What is this? a new teaching with authority! and he gives orders to the unclean spirits and they obey him. " 28 And the report about him went out at once everywhere in the whole region of Galilee.
32 And when evening was come, and the sun was set, they brought to him all who were ill and all the demoniacs; 33 and the whole city was gathered at the door; 34 and he cured many who were ill with various diseases, and expelled many demons, and would not let the demons speak, because they knew him.
35 And in the morning, while it was still deep in the night, he rose and went out, and went away to a lonely place and prayed there.
36 And Simon and those who were with him followed him up 37 and found him, and said to him "Everybody is looking for you. " 38 And he said to them "Let us go elsewhere, to the adjoining towns, that I may make my proclamation there too; for it was for this that I came out. " 39 And he came to all Galilee making the proclamation in their synagogues and expelling the demons.
Mark
2:1-28
2 And upon his coming into Capernaum again after some days it was heard that he was in the house, 2 and great numbers gathered, so that there was no longer room for them even around the door.
And he was speaking the word to them, 3 and there came people bringing to him a paralyzed man borne by four.
4 And, not being able to bring the man to him because of the crowd, they took off the roofing where he was, and, by breaking a hole, let down the pallet on which the paralyzed man was lying.
5 And Jesus, seeing their faith, said to the paralyzed man "My child, your sins are forgiven. " 6 But there were some of the scribes sitting there and inwardly questioning 7 "Why does this man speak so? he is blaspheming; who can forgive sins but one, God? " 8 And at once Jesus, recognizing in his spirit that they were thus questioning in their minds, said to them "Why are you inwardly questioning like that? 9 Which is easier, to say to a paralyzed man your ‘sins are forgiven’ or to say rise, and take up your pallet and walk’? 10 But, that you may know that the Son of Man has authority to forgive sins on earth " said he to the paralyzed man, 11 "I say to you, Rise, take up your pallet and go home. " 12 And he rose and at once took up the pallet and went out before them all, so that all of them were surprised and glorified God, saying "We never saw anything like this. "
13 And he went out by the seaside again; and all the masses came to him, and he taught them.
14 And in passing he saw Levi the son of Alpheus sitting in a customhouse office, and said to him "Follow me "; and he rose and followed him.
15 And it so befell that he was eating a meal in his house, and there were many customhouse officers and people of bad character at the table with Jesus and his disciples (for there were many of them, and they accompanied him), 16 and the scribes of the Pharisees, seeing that he was eating with the people of bad character and the customhouse officers, said to his disciples "Why does he eat with the customhouse officers and people of bad character? " 17 And Jesus, hearing it, said to them "Not the able-bodied, but the ill, need a physician; I have not come to call saints, but sinners. "
18 And John’s disciples and the Pharisees were fasting; and they came and said to him "Why is it that John’s disciples and the Pharisees’ disciples fast, but your disciples do not? " 19 and Jesus said to them "Can the wedding guests fast while the bridegroom is with them? so long as they have the bridegroom with them they cannot fast.
20 But there will come days, when the bridegroom is taken from them, and then, in that day, they will fast.
21 Nobody sews a piece of unfulled cloth upon an old cloak; if one does, the filler takes some away from it, the new from the old, and a worse hole is made.
22 And nobody puts new wine in old skins; if one does, the wine will burst the skins, and the wine is lost, and so are the skins; but new wine goes in fresh skins. "
23 And it befell that on the Sabbath he was on his way across the grainfields, and his disciples began to make a way picking the ears; 24 and the Pharisees said to him "There, why are they doing on the sabbath what is not lawful? " 25 and he said to them "Did you never read what David did when he, and those who were with him, were in need and hungry? 26 how he went into the house of God in the high-priesthood of Abiathar and ate the showbread, which it is not lawful that any but the priests should eat, and gave it to those who were with him too? " 27 And he said to them "The sabbath was made for man and not man for the sabbath; 28 so that the Son of Man is master even of the sabbath. "
3:1-35
3 And he went into a synagogue again, and there was a man there with his hand shriveled; 2 and they were watching him to see if he would cure him on the sabbath, that they might arraign him.
3 And he said to the man with the shriveled hand "Stand forward "; 4 and he said to them "Is it lawful on the sabbath to do a good act or to do harm, to save a life or to kill? " but they were silent.
5 And he looked around at them in anger, grieving over their lumpish-heartedness, and said to the man "Stretch out your hand "; and he stretched it out, and his hand was restored.
6 And the Pharisees went out and at once entered into a plot with the Herodians against him to make away with him.
7 And Jesus, with his disciples, retired to the seaside; and a great multitude from Galilee followed him, 8 and from Judea and from Jerusalem and from Idumea and the other side of the Jordan and around Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude, hearing how much he was doing, came to him.
9 And he told his disciples to have a boat attend on him because of the mass of people, that they might not crowd him: 10 for he had cured many, so that any who had complaints were throwing themselves against him in order to touch him.
11 And the unclean spirits, when they saw him, fell down before him and screamed "You are the Son of God. " 12 And he told them peremptorily over and over not to make him known.
13 And he went up on the mountainside and summoned whom he pleased, and they went to him.
And he came back to the house; 20 and the crowd came together again so that they could not even eat a meal; 21 and his family, hearing of it, went out to seize him, for they said he was out of his senses.
22 And the scribes that had come down from Jerusalem said that he had Beelzebul, and that it was by the head of the demons that he expelled the demons.
23 And he called them to him and said to them with parables "How can Satan expel Satan? 24 And if a kingdom is divided against itself, that kingdom cannot be kept up; 25 and if a family is divided against itself, that family will not be able to stand; 26 and if Satan has stood up against himself and is divided, he cannot stand, but is at an end.
27 But nobody can enter a strong man’s house and plunder it of his goods unless he first binds the strong man, and then he shall plunder his house.
31 And his mother and his brothers came and stood outside and sent to him to call him; 32 and there was a crowd sitting around him, and they told him "Here are your mother and your brothers outside looking for you. " 33 And he answered them "Who is my mother, and my brothers? " 34 and, looking around at those who were sitting round about him, he said "Here are my mother and my brothers! 35 for whoever does the will of God, he is my brother and sister and mother. " Mark 4:1-41
4 And again he began to teach by the seaside; and a very great crowd gathered to him, so that he got into a boat and sat in it on the sea, and all the crowd were close to the sea on the land; 2 and he taught them much in parables, and said to them in his teaching 3 "Listen: once upon a time a sower went out to sow.
4 And in the sowing one seed fell on the roadside, and the birds came and ate it up; 5 and another fell on the rocky ground where it had not much soil, and came up at once because of not having any depth of soil, 6 and was scorched when the sun rose, and dried up because of not having roots; 7 and another fell in among the thorns, and the thorns grew up and stifled it, and it yielded no crop; 8 and others fell into the good soil and yielded a crop, shooting up and growing, and bore at the rate of thirty and sixty and a hundred. " 9 And he said "Let him who has ears to hear, hear! "
10 And when he was in private his companions, with the Twelve, asked him about the parables; 11 and he said to them "To you is given the secret of the Reign of God, but for those outsiders everything is in parables, 12 that when they see they may see without perceiving, and when they hear they may hear without understanding, for fear they should turn back and be forgiven. " 13 And he said to them "You do not know this parable? and how are you to make out all parables? 14 The sower is sowing the word; 15 and these are the ones by the road, where the word is sowed, and when they hear, at once Satan comes and takes away the word that was sowed in them.
16 And in the same way these are the ones that are sowed on the rocky ground: they who, when they hear the word, at once receive it with joy, 17 and do not have any roots in them but are temporary, and then, when there comes distress or persecution because of the word, are staggered at once.
18 And others are the ones that are sowed in among the thorns; these are they who hear the word, 19 and temporal anxieties and the deceits of wealth, and desires as to other things, step in and stifle the word and it becomes unfruitful.
20 And those are the ones that are sowed on the good soil who hear the word and accept it, and bear their crop at the rate of thirty and sixty and a hundred. "
21 And he said to them "Does the lamp come that it may be put under the peck measure or under the couch? does it not go on the stand? 22 For there is nothing that is secret except with a view to its being disclosed, nor has anything been concealed except with a view to its being brought to light.
23 Whoever has ears to hear, let him hear! " 24 And he said to them "Look out what you hear.
The measure that you give shall be given to you, and you shall have more added to it.
25 For to him who has, more shall be given; and from him who has not, even what he has shall be taken away. "
29 But when the crop permits he sends in the sickle at once, because the harvest is here. "
30 And he said "How shall we illustrate the Reign of God, or by what parable shall we set it forth? 31 Like a grain of mustard, which, though when it is sowed in the ground it is the smallest of all the seeds in the ground, 32 yet, when it is sowed, grows up and becomes the largest of all the plants and makes great branches, so that the birds of the air can perch under its shadow. "
33 And with many such parables he spoke the word to them, in a way that they could take in, 34 and did not speak to them without parable; but to his disciples, when they were by themselves, he explained everything.
35 And he said to them that day when evening came "Let us go over to the other side "; 36 and they left the crowd and took him with them in the boat as he was.
And there were other boats with him.
37 And there came a great squall of wind, and the waves were breaking over the side of the boat, so that the boat was getting full; 38 and he was in the stern asleep on the cushion.
And they waked him and said to him "Teacher, do you not care that we are perishing? " 39 And when he woke up he rebuked the wind and said to the sea "Hush! break off! " and the wind lulled, and there came a great calm.
40 And he said to them "Why are you so timorous? do you not yet have faith? " 41 And they were greatly frightened, and said to each other "Who then is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him? "
5:1-43
5 And they came to the other side of the sea, to the country of the Gerasenes.
2 And when he came out of the boat, at once there met him out of the tombs a man with an unclean spirit, 3 who had his residence in the tombs, and whom no one could bind any longer, even with a chain; 4 because he had often been bound with fetters and chains, and the chains had been wrenched apart by him and the fetters shattered, and nobody was able to subdue him.
5 And he was all the time, night and day, screaming and hacking himself with stones in the tombs and on the mountainsides.
6 And, seeing Jesus from a distance, he ran and did him reverence 7 and said with a loud scream "What have you to do with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God?
I adjure you by God, do not torture me " 8 for he was saying to him "Come out of the man, unclean spirit. " 9 And he put the question to him "What is your name? " and he said to him "My name is Brigade because there are many of us. " 10 And he appealed to him over and over not to send them off out of the country.
11 Now there was there at the foot of the mountain a large herd of hogs feeding; 12 and they appealed to him with the request "Send us among the hogs, so that we may go into them. " 13 And he gave them permission, and the unclean spirits came out and went into the hogs, and the herd bolted down the steep bank into the sea, about two thousand of them, and were drowned in the sea; 14 and the men who were tending them ran away, and reported it in the city and in the fields, and they came to see what it was that had happened.
15 And they came to Jesus and saw the demoniac sitting down, clothed and sane, the one that had had the brigade, and they were afraid; 16 and those who had seen it told them the story of what had happened to the demoniac, and about the hogs; 17 and they began to appeal to him to go away from their territory.
18 And as he was stepping into the boat the man who had been demon-ridden appealed to him to let him be with him; 19 and he would not let him, but said to him "Go home to your people and report to them how much the Lord has done for you and what mercy he has shown you "; 20 and he went away and began to proclaim in the Decapolis how much Jesus had done for him, and they all wondered at it.
21 And when Jesus had crossed over to the other side again in the boat, a great crowd gathered about him while he was by the seaside.
22 And there came one of the directors of the synagogue, Jair by name; and at seeing him he threw himself down at his feet 23 and appealed to him over and over, saying "My little daughter is at the point of death; come and lay your hands on her to make her get well and live "; 24 and he went off with him, and a great crowd followed him and were pressing against him.
25 And a woman who had been having a flow of blood twelve years, 26 and had had a great many things done to her by many physicians and spent everything in her house and got no good from it but rather grown worse, 27 having heard about Jesus, came in the crowd behind and touched his cloak 28 for she said "If I touch even his clothes I shall be made well " ; 29 and at once the trickling of her blood dried up, and she felt that she was healed of her complaint.
30 And at once Jesus, recognizing that the power from him had gone out, turned back in the crowd and said "Who touched my clothes? " 31 And his disciples said to him "You see the crowd pressing against you, and do you say ‘Who touched me’? " 32 And he looked around to see the one that had done that.
33 And the woman, frightened and trembling, knowing what she had had done to her, came and threw herself down before him and told him all the truth; 34 and he said to her "Daughter, your faith has made you well; go, and good betide you; be well of your complaint. "
35 While he was still speaking, people came from the director’s house saying "Your daughter has died; why put the teacher out anymore? " 36 But Jesus, overhearing the words spoken, said to the director "Do not be afraid, only believe. " 37 And he would not let anyone go along with him except Peter and James and James’s brother John.
38 And they came to the director’s house; and he saw a commotion, and people weeping and yelling at a great rate, 39 and he went in and said to them "Why are you raising a commotion and weeping? the child is not dead but asleep "; 40 and they laughed at him.
But he, putting them all out of the house, took the child’s father and mother and those who were with him and went in where the child was, 41 and grasped the child’s hand and said to her "Talitha, kum, " which means "Girl, stand up "; 42 and at once the girl rose and walked (for she was twelve years old), and they were at once seized with great surprise.
43 And he charged them over and over that nobody should know of this, and directed that she be given something to eat.
6:1-56
6 And he went out from there and came to his hometown, and his disciples followed him; 2 and when a sabbath came he began to teach in the synagogue.
And as they listened most of them were astonished, saying "Where does this man get this? and what wisdom is it that is given to this man, and such miracles done by his hands? 3 why, this is the carpenter, Mary’s son, the brother of James and Jose and Judah and Simon, and his sisters are here among us "; and they were staggered at him.
4 And Jesus told them "A prophet is not unhonored anywhere but in his hometown and among his relatives and in his house "; 5 and he could not do any miracle there except that he laid his hands on a few invalids and cured them.
6 And he wondered at their unbelievingness.
7 And he went about the surrounding villages teaching.
29 And when his disciples heard of it they came and took up his corpse and laid it in a tomb.
30 And the apostles rejoined Jesus, and reported to him all that they had been doing and teaching.
31 And he said to them "Come to a lonely place, you by yourselves, and rest a little " (for there were many coming and going, and they had not even opportunity to eat); 32 and off they went in the boat to a lonely place by themselves.
And they said to him "Shall we go and buy two hundred denarii worth of bread and give it to them to eat? " 38 But he said to them "How many cakes of bread have you? go see. "
And they found out and told him "Five, and two fishes. " 39 And he ordered them to take their places on the green grass, 40 all of them, by parties; and they took their places, by hundreds and by fifties, like beds in a garden.
41 And he took the five cakes and the two fishes and looked up to the sky and pronounced the blessing, and broke up the cakes and gave them to the disciples to set before them; and he divided the two fishes among them all; 42 and they all ate and had their fill.
43 And they took up fragments of the bread to the amount of twelve basketfuls also of the fishes; 44 and it was five thousand men that had eaten the bread.
45 And at once he made the disciples get into the boat and go to Bethsaida, on the other side, ahead of him, while he dismissed the crowd; 46 and when he had bidden them farewell he went off to the mountain to pray.
47 And when evening came the boat was in the middle of the sea, and he on the land alone; and, 48 as he saw them having a hard time in rowing, for the wind was against them, about the fourth watch of the night he came toward them walking on the sea.
And he was on the point of passing by them; 49 but they, seeing him walking on the sea, thought it was an apparition, and screamed out; 50 for they all saw him and were alarmed.
But he spoke with them at once, and said to them "All right, it is I; do not be afraid. " 51 And he stepped into the boat with them, and the wind lulled; and they were most exceedingly surprised, 52 for they had not understood in the matter of the bread, but their hearts were lumpish.
20 And he said "What goes out of a man, that defiles the man.
21 For from inside, from men’s hearts, go out evil designs, unchastities, thefts, murders, 22 adulteries, overreachings, villainies, trickery, brutality, stinginess, abusive language, arrogance, foolery, 23 all these wicked things go out from inside, and do defile the man. "
24 And he left there and went away to the territory of Tyre, and went into a house and wanted nobody to know of it; and he could not escape notice, 25 but at once, hearing about him, a woman whose little daughter had an unclean spirit came and threw herself down at his feet.
26 And the woman was a Greek, a Syrophenician by race; and she was asking him to expel the demon from her daughter, 27 and he was saying to her "Let the children have their fill first, for it is not a good thing to take the children’s bread and throw it to the dogs. " 28 But she answered him "Yes, sir, even the dogs under the table eat of the children’s crumbs. " 29 And he said to her "Because of those words, go; the demon has gone out of your daughter. " 30 And she went home and found the child down on the couch, and the demon gone out.
31 And he went out of the territory of Tyre again, and came through Sidon to the Sea of Galilee at a point in the middle of the territory of the Decapolis.
32 And they brought him a deaf man who had an impediment in his speech, and appealed to him to lay his hand on him; 33 and he took him away from the crowd by himself and ran his fingers into his ears, and spat and touched his tongue, 34 and looked up into the sky and groaned and said to him "Ethpethah, " that is "Be opened. " 35 And his ears were opened, and at once the tie of his tongue was undone and he spoke rightly.
36 And he charged them not to tell anybody; but the more he charged them, all the more they proclaimed it.
37 And they were supremely astonished, saying "He has done well in everything: he even makes the deaf hear and the dumb speak. "
8:1-38
8 In those days, when there was again a great crowd and they did not have anything to eat, he called his disciples to him and said to them 2 "I feel for the crowd, because it is now three days they have been staying with me and not had anything to eat; 3 and if I dismiss them fasting, they will grow faint on the road; and some of them are from a long way off. " 4 And his disciples answered him "Where can one get these their fill of bread here in the wilderness? " 5 and he asked them "How much bread have you? " and they said "Seven cakes. " 6 And he instructed the crowd to take their places on the ground, and took the seven cakes and gave thanks and broke them and gave them to the disciples to put around; and they set them before the crowd.
7 And they had a few little fish; and he blessed these too and told them to put them around.
8 And they all ate and had their fill; and they took up surplus fragments, seven hampers.
9 And there were about four thousand of them.
And he dismissed them, 10 and at once got into the boat with his disciples and came into the parts of Dalmanutha.
11 And the Pharisees went out and began to debate with him, seeking from him a token from heaven, by way of testing him.
12 And he heaved a sigh and said "Why does this generation seek a token?
I tell you verily this generation shall not be given a token "; 13 and he left them and went on board again and went off to the other side.
14 And they forgot to take bread, and had not but one cake with them in the boat.
15 And he was charging them "See that you keep clear of Pharisee yeast and Herod’s yeast "; 16 and they questioned together, saying that they had not bread.
17 And, finding it out, he said to them "Why are you questioning because you have not bread? do you not yet see the point nor understand? are your hearts caked into lumps? 18 having eyes, do you not see, and having ears do you not hear? and do you not remember 19 when I broke the five cakes of bread to be given out to the five thousand, how many baskets full of fragments you took up? "
They told him "Twelve. " 20 "When I broke the seven to be given out to the four thousand, how many hamperfuls of fragments did you take up? " and they said "Seven, " 21 And he said to them "Do you not understand yet? "
22 And they came to Bethsaida; and they brought him a blind man, and appealed to him to touch him.
23 And he took hold of the blind man’s hand and took him outside the village, and, spitting into his eyes and laying his hands on him, put the question to him "Can you see anything? " 24 and he looked up and said "I can see men, because I see creatures like trees walking. " 25 Then he laid his hands on his eyes again, and his eyesight was good, and he was restored and was able to see everything distinctly.
26 And he sent him home, saying "Do not even go into the village. "
27 And Jesus and his disciples went out to the villages of Caesarea Philippi; and on the road he questioned his disciples, asking them "Who do people say I am? " 28 And they told him "John the Baptist; and others Elijah; and others one of the prophets. " 29 And he put the question to them, "But who do you say I am? "
Peter answered him "You are the Messiah. " 30 And he told them peremptorily not to tell anybody about him.
31 And he began to teach them that the Son of Man must suffer a great deal, and be rejected by the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and rise after three days; 32 and he made the statement openly.
And Peter took him in hand and began to rebuke him; 33 but he, turning back and seeing his disciples, rebuked Peter and said "Go behind me, Satan, because you do not have God’s ideas but men’s. "
34 And he called the crowd to him, with his disciples, and said to them "If anyone wishes to come after me, let him disown himself and take up his cross and follow me.
35 For whoever wishes to save his self will lose it, but whoever loses his self on my account and the gospel’s will save it.
36 For what good does it do a man to make a profit of the whole world and a loss of his self? 37 for what should a man give as an equivalent for his self? 38 For whoever is ashamed of me and my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of Man too will be ashamed of him when he comes in his Father’s glory with the holy angels. "
9:1-50
9 And he said to them "I tell you verily that there are some here standing among you who shall not taste death till they see the Reign of God begun in power. "
2 And after six days Jesus took Peter and James and John and brought them up on the side of a high mountain alone by themselves, and was transfigured before them; 3 and his clothes became glittering, exceedingly white, such as no fuller on earth can whiten so.
4 And there appeared to them Elijah with Moses, and they talked with Jesus.
5 And Peter answered by saying to Jesus "Rabbi, it is a good thing we are here: let us make three booths, one for you and one for Moses and one for Elijah " 6 for he did not know what answer to make, because they were terrified.
7 And there came a cloud overshadowing them, and there came a voice out of the cloud, "This is my dear son, listen to him. " 8 And of a sudden they looked around and no longer saw any body but Jesus alone with themselves.
9 And as they were coming down from the mountain he charged them never to tell anybody the story of what they had seen till the Son of Man rose from the dead; 10 and they held the word fast to themselves, debating what rising from the dead was.
11 And they put the question to him "Why do the scribes say that Elijah must come first? " 12 and he said to them "Elijah comes first and restores everything and how is it it is written about the Son of Man that he should suffer a great deal and be scorned? 13 But I tell you that Elijah has come and they have done to him whatever they wished, as is written about him. "
14 And when they got to the disciples they saw a great crowd around them, and scribes debating with them.
15 And at once all the crowd were taken aback at seeing him; and they ran up and greeted him, 16 and he put the question to them "What are you debating with them about? " 17 And one of the crowd answered him "Teacher, I have brought my son to you, that has a dumb spirit, 18 and wherever it gets at him it strikes him down, and he foams and sets his teeth hard and withers up; and I told your disciples to expel it and they were not able. " 19 And he answered them "O unbelieving generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I bear with you? bring him to me "; 20 and they brought him to him.
And upon seeing him the demon threw him into a convulsion at once, and he fell on the ground and rolled there foaming.
21 And he questioned his father, "How long has he had this? " and he said "Since his childhood; 22 and it has often thrown him into fire and into water, to make away with him; but if you can do anything have pity on us and help us. " 23 And Jesus said to him "‘If you can’!
Everything is possible to him who believes! " 24 At once the child’s father gave a cry "I believe; help my unbelievingness. " 25 And Jesus, seeing that a crowd was running up, said peremptorily to the unclean spirit "Dumb and deaf spirit, I order you, come out of him and do not come into him again. " 26 And with a scream and many convulsions it came out, and he became as if dead, so that most of them said he was dead; 27 but Jesus grasped his hand and raised him, and he stood up.
28 And when he came indoors and they were by themselves his disciples put the question to him "How was it we could not expel it? " 29 and he said to them "This kind cannot be got out by anything but prayer. "
30 And they went out from there and went along through Galilee; and he would not have anyone know of it, 31 for he was teaching his disciples and telling them that the Son of Man was to be given up into the hands of men, and they would kill him, and when he had been killed he would rise after three days.
32 But they failed to understand the word, and were afraid to question him.
33 And they came to Capernaum; and when he got into the house he put the question to them "What were you talking over on the road? " 34 But they were silent, for they had been arguing together on the road about which was greatest.
35 And he sat down and called the Twelve and said to them "If one means to be first, he shall be last of all and serving-man to all. " 36 And he took a child and set it in the middle among them, and, putting his arms around it, said to them 37 "Anybody who receives one of the children in my name is receiving me, and anybody who receives me is receiving not me but him who sent me. " 38 John said to him "Teacher, we saw somebody expelling demons in your name, and we stopped him because he did not follow us. " 39 But Jesus said "Do not stop him, for there is no one who will work a miracle in my name and be able to go right to abusing me.
40 For he who is not against us is for us.
41 For anybody who gives you a cup of water to drink on the ground that you belong to the Messiah, I tell you verily, shall not lose his reward; 42 and anybody who trips up one of these little ones who believe, it would sooner be a good thing for him if he had an ass-power millstone hanging round his neck and had been thrown into the sea.
43 And if your hand trips you up, cut it off: it is better that you pass into life one-armed than that with both your hands you should go into hell, into the inextinguishable fire.
44 45 And if your foot trips you up, cut it off: it is better that you pass into life a cripple than that with both your feet you should be thrown into hell.
46 47 And if your eye trips you up, tear it out; it is better that you pass into the Reign of God one-eyed than that with two eyes you should be thrown into hell, 48 where their worm does not die and their fire does not go out.
49 For everyone shall be salted with fire.
50 Salt is a good thing, but if the salt has lost its saltness what will you season it with?
Have salt in yourselves and be at peace with each other. " Mark 10:1-52
10 And he went away from there and came into the territory of Judea and the other side of the Jordan; and crowds collected around him again, and he taught them again as was his custom.
And 2 Pharisees approached him and put the question to him, to test him, whether it is lawful for a husband to divorce a wife.
3 But he answered them "What commands did Moses give you? " 4 And they said "Moses permitted writing a certificate of separation and divorcing her; " 5 But Jesus said to them "It was in view of your obduracy that he wrote you this commandment.
6 But from the first of the creation he ‘made them male and female’; 7 ‘for this a man shall leave his father and mother, 8 and the two shall become one flesh’; so that they are no longer two but one flesh.
9 So let not a man part what God has joined. " 10 And when they got into the house the disciples questioned him again about this; 11 and he said to them "Whoever divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery against her; 12 and if she divorces her husband and marries another she commits adultery. "
13 And they brought children to him to have him touch them; but the disciples rebuked them.
14 But Jesus was offended at seeing it, and said to them "Let the children come to me, do not interfere with them; for to such belongs the Reign of God.
28 Peter began to say to him "We here did leave everything and followed you. " 29 Said Jesus, "I tell you verily, there is nobody who has left house or brothers or sisters or mother or father or children or lands on my account and the gospel’s 30 but shall receive a hundredfold now in this time, houses and brothers and sisters and mothers and children and lands, with persecutions, and in the coming age eternal life.
31 But many of the first will be last, and the last first. "
32 And they were on the road, going up to Jerusalem, and Jesus going ahead of them, and they were amazed; and those who followed were afraid.
And he took the Twelve with him again and began to tell them the things that were to befall him: 33 "here we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be put into the hands of the chief priests and the scribes, and they will condemn him to death and hand him over to the foreigners, 34 and they will outrage him and spit on him and flog him and kill him, and after three days he will rise. "
35 And James and John, the sons of Zebedee, went to him and said to him "Teacher, we want you to do for us what we shall ask you. " 36 And he said to them "What do you want me to do for you? " 37 And they said to him "Grant us that we shall sit one on your right hand and one on your left in your glory. " 38 But Jesus said to them "You do not know what you are asking for.
Can you drink the cup that I am drinking, or go under the water that I am going under? " 39 And they said to him "We can. "
51 And Jesus answered him "What do you want me to do for you? " and the blind man said to him "Rabbuni, that I may have my eyesight back. " 52 And Jesus said to him "Go; your faith has made you well, " and at once he recovered his sight and followed him along the road.
11:1-33
11 And when they were drawing near to Jerusalem, to Bethphage and Bethany at the Mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples 2 and said to them "Go to the village opposite you, and at once as you are entering it you will find a colt hitched, on which no man ever yet sat; unhitch it and bring it.
3 And if anybody says to you ‘Why are you doing that?’ say ‘The Lord needs it; and he will send it back here at once.’ " 4 And they went, and found a colt hitched at a door, out in the roadway, and went to unhitching it; 5 and some of those who were standing there said to them "What are you doing untying the colt? " 6 but they told them what Jesus told them to, and they let them alone.
7 And they brought the colt to Jesus and laid their cloaks on it, and he took his seat on it.
8 And many spread their cloaks in the road, and others green things that they cut from the fields; 9 and those who went ahead and who followed were crying "Hosanna! 10 blessed is he who is coming in the name of the Lord; blessed is the reign that is coming, our father David’s; hosanna on high! "
11 And he came into Jerusalem and into the temple-precinct; and he looked around at everything, and, the hour being already late, went out to Bethany with the Twelve.
12 And when they came out from Bethany on the following day, he felt hungry, 13 and, seeing at a distance a fig-tree with leaves, went to see if he might find anything on it.
And when he came to it he found nothing but leaves; for it was not time for figs.
14 And he answered by saying to it "Never again let anyone eat fruit from you "; and his disciples heard him.
15 And they came to Jerusalem; and he went into the temple-precinct and began to turn out those who were selling and buying in the precinct, and threw down the money-changers’ tables and the pigeon-sellers’ seats, 16 and would not let anybody carry an article through the precinct; 17 and he taught and said to them "Is it not written ‘My house shall be called a house of prayer for all nations’? but you have made it a robbers’ cave "; 18 and the chief priests and the scribes heard it, and tried to find a way to destroy him; for they were afraid of him, for all the crowd was astonished over his teaching.
19 And when it grew late they went out outside the city.
20 And as they were going past in the morning they saw the fig-tree withered to the root; 21 and Peter recollected about it and said to him "Rabbi, there is the fig-tree that you cursed withered up. " 22 And Jesus answered by saying to them "Have faith in God; 23 I tell you verily that anyone who says to this mountain ‘Be taken up and be thrown into the sea,’ and does not inwardly doubt but believes that what he utters will be done, shall have it so.
24 Accordingly I tell you, everything that you pray and ask for, believe that you have got it and you shall have it.
25 And when you stand praying, forgive whatever you have against anybody, that your Father in heaven may also forgive you your offenses. "
26 27 And they came into Jerusalem again; and as he was walking in the temple-precinct the chief priests and the scribes and the elders came to him 28 and said to him "By what authority are you doing these things? or who gave you this authority to do these things? " 29 But Jesus said to them "I will put one question to you; answer me and I will tell you by what authority I am doing these things.
30 Was John’s baptizing from heaven or from men? answer me. " 31 And they went over the question to themselves, thinking "If we say ‘From heaven’ he will say ‘Then why did you not believe him?’ 32 but shall we say ‘From men’? " they were afraid of the populace, for one and all looked on John as having been a real prophet.
33 And they answered Jesus "We do not know. " And Jesus said to them "And neither do I tell you by what authority I am doing these things. "
Mark 12:1-44 12 And he began to speak to them in parables: "A man set out a vineyard, and put a fence round it and dug out a receiver for the wine and built a tower, and rented it to farmers and went abroad.
2 And at the proper date he sent a servant to receive from the farmers some of the produce of the vineyard; 3 and they took him and gave him a beating and sent him off empty-handed.
4 And again he sent another servant to them; and they broke that one’s head and insulted him.
5 And he sent another, and him they killed; and many others, beating some and killing some.
9 What will the owner of the vineyard do? he will come and kill off the farmers, and give the vineyard to others.
10 Have you not even read this text, ‘The stone that the builders condemned, that stone has come to be the top of the corner: 11 this was from the Lord, and is wonderful in our eyes’? " 12 And they tried to seize him; and they were afraid of the crowd for they perceived that he had aimed the parable at them and let him go and went away.
13 And they sent to him some of the Pharisees and the Herodians, to fish for him with talk; 14 and they came and said to him "Teacher, we know that you are truthful and care for nobody, for you do not look at men’s faces but teach the way of God in good faith: is paying taxes to Caesar lawful or unlawful? 15 shall we pay or shall we not? "
But he, knowing their hypocrisy, said to them "Why are you trying tricks on me? bring me a denarius so that I can see it. " 16 And they brought one.
And he said to them "Whose is this portrait and this inscription? " and they said to him "Caesar’s. " 17 And Jesus said to them "Pay what is Caesar’s to Caesar and what is God’s to God. "
And they admired him.
20 There were seven brothers, and the first took a wife and left no issue at his death, 21 and the second took her and died without leaving any issue behind, and the third in the same way, 22 and the seven left no issue.
Last of all, the woman died too.
23 At the resurrection, when they rise, which of them will she be the wife of? for the seven had her as wife. " 24 Said Jesus to them, "Is not this why you go wrong, not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God? 25 for when they rise from the dead they do not marry but are like angels in heaven.
26 But as to the dead, that they are raised, have you not read in the book of Moses, in the part about the bush, how God told him ‘I am the God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob’? 27 He is not the God of dead men but of living men.
You are very far wrong. "
And no one dared put any further questions to him.
And the great crowd listened to him gladly.
38 And in his teaching he said "Look out for the scribes, who are bound to go in robes and to have greetings in the marketplaces 39 and the first seats in synagogues and the first places at dinners: 40 those who eat up widows’ houses and make a pretense of long prayers these shall receive more of a sentence. "
41 And he sat down opposite the treasury and looked at the way in which the crowd dropped coins into the treasury; and many rich men dropped in a great deal.
42 And one poor widow came and dropped in two mites, that is, a farthing.
Mark
13:1-37
13 And as he was on his way out of the temple-precinct, one of his disciples said to him "Teacher, look what stones and what architecture! " 2 And Jesus said to him "You see this great architecture? there shall not be one stone left on another that shall not be torn down. " 3 And when he was sitting on the side of the Mount of Olives opposite the temple-precinct Peter and James and John and Andrew put the question to him as they were by themselves, 4 "Tell us when this will be, and what will be the sign when all this is to come to its end? " 5 And Jesus began to say to them "Look out that no one deludes you; 6 many will come under my name, saying that it is I, and delude many.
7 And when you hear of wars and rumors of wars, do not be disquieted; they have to come, but it is not yet the end.
8 For nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, there will be earthquakes in one place and another, there will be famines; this is the beginning of the birth-pangs.
10 And the gospel must be proclaimed first among all the nations.
11 And when they arrest you and carry you off, do not fret beforehand over what you are to speak, but whatever is given you at the moment, that speak; for it is not you that are speaking but the Holy Spirit.
12 And a brother will have a brother arrested and put to death, and a father a child; and children will stand up against parents and have them put to death; 13 and you will be hated by all because of my name; but he who holds out to the end, he will come safe through.
14 "But when you see the desolating abomination standing where it ought not (let the reader note), then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains; 15 let him who is on the roof not go down or in to take away anything from his house, 16 and let him who is in the field not go back to pick up his cloak; 17 and woe to women who are pregnant and nursing in those days! 18 But pray that it may not come in winter; 19 for those days will be a distress such as there has not been from the beginning of God’s creation till now, nor shall be.
20 And if the Lord had not cut the days short, no flesh would have come safe through; but because of the chosen whom he had singled out he did cut the days short.
21 And then if anybody says to you ‘here is the Messiah in this place,’ ‘here he is in that,’ do not believe it; 22 for there will arise pretended Messiahs and pretended prophets, and they will exhibit tokens and wonders to lead the chosen astray if possible.
23 But you are to look out: I have told you everything beforehand.
24 "But in those days, after that distress, the sun will turn dark and the moon will not give its radiance, 25 and the stars will be falling from the sky, and the powers in the heavens will be shaken; 26 and then will they see the Son of Man coming among clouds with great power and glory; 27 and then will he send out the angels and gather his chosen from the four winds, from the extremity of the earth to the extremity of the heavens.
28 "But learn from the fig-tree this parable: when its twigs come to turn tender and put out their leaves you know that the summer is near; 29 so you too, when you see these things taking place, are to know that he is near, at the doors.
30 I tell you verily that this generation shall not pass away until all this takes place.
31 The heavens and the earth will pass away, but my words will not.
32 But as to that day or that hour nobody knows, neither the angels in heaven nor the Son, but the Father. 33 Look to it, keep on the alert; for you do not know when the time is.
34 As a man going abroad, leaving his house and giving commissions to his servants, to each one his work, gave the doorman too a command, to keep awake 35 keep awake then, for you do not know when the master of the house is coming, whether at evening or at midnight or at cockcrow or at morning; 36 lest he should come all of a sudden and find you asleep.
37 And what I am saying to you I am saying to everybody: keep awake! " Mark
14:1-72 14 And after two days it would be passover and matzoth-time; and the chief priests and scribes were trying to find a way to seize him by trickery and kill him; 2 for they said "Not during the feast, for fear there should be a disturbance among the people. " 3 And while he was in Bethany at the house of Simon the leper, while he was at the table a woman came with an alabaster vial of expensive perfume, nard in pistachio oil.
She crushed the vial and poured it over his head.
6 But Jesus said "Let her be; why are you worrying her? she has done a good deed by me.
7 For you always have the poor with you, and can do good to them when you choose, but me you do not always have.
8 She did what she had the power to; she scented my body beforehand for burial; 9 and I tell you verily, wherever the gospel is proclaimed in the whole world, what she did will also be spoken of for a memorial of her. " 10 And Judas Iscarioth, the Judas Iscarioth who was one of the Twelve, went off to the chief priests to put him into their hands; 11 and they were glad to hear his proposition, and promised to give him money, and he went to looking for a way to deliver him to them under favorable circumstances.
18 And while they were at the table eating, Jesus said "I tell you verily that one of you will have me arrested, he who is eating with me. " 19 They began to be pained and to say to him one by one "Am I the one? " 20 and he said to them "One of the Twelve, one who dips into the dish with me 21 because the Son of Man goes as is written of him, but woe to that man through whom the Son of Man is put under arrest; it would have been well for that man if he had not been born. "
22 And while they were eating he took a cake of bread, and pronounced the blessing and broke it and gave it to them, and said "Take this: this is my body. " 23 And he took a cup, and gave thanks over it and gave it to them, and they all drank from it; 24 and he said to them "This is my covenant blood poured out for many.
25 I tell you verily I will drink of this produce of the vine no more till that day when I drink it new in the Reign of God. "
26 And they sang the hymns and went out to the Mount of Olives.
But not what I will, but what you. " 37 And he came and found them asleep, and said to Peter "Simon, are you asleep? were you not able to keep awake one moment? 38 Keep awake and pray, that you may not fall under temptation: the spirit is enthusiastic but the flesh is weak. " 39 And he went away again and prayed, saying the same thing; 40 and again he came and found them asleep, for their eyes were weighed down; and they did not know what answer to make to him.
41 And he came the third time and said to them "Well, then, sleep and rest; that will do; the moment has come; lo, the Son of Man is given up into the hands of the sinners 42 rise, let us be going; here is the one who gives me up to them, coming right on. "
43 And at once, while he was still speaking, Judas, one of the Twelve, arrived, and with him a crowd with swords and sticks from the chief priests and the elders and the scribes.
44 And the one who was giving him up had given them a cue, telling them "Whichever I kiss is he; take him and get him safely away. " 45 And when he came, at once he went up to him and said "Rabbi, " and went to kissing him; 46 and they put their hands on him and took him.
47 But someone of those who were present drew his sword and struck the high priest’s servant and took off his ear.
48 And Jesus answered them "You come out as if it were against a robber, with swords and sticks, to arrest me; 49 I had been among you in the temple-precinct day by day teaching, and you did not take me.
But it is in order that the scriptures may be fulfilled. " 50 And everybody left him and ran.
51 And a young man went along with him, who had a linen wrapper on his naked body; 52 and they seized him, but he ran away naked, leaving the wrapper.
53 And they took Jesus to the high priest’s house; and all the chief priests and the elders and the scribes came together.
54 And Peter had followed him at a distance clear into the high priest’s courtyard, and was sitting with the officers and warming himself in the light.
55 And the chief priests and the whole Sanhedrin were looking for testimony against Jesus for putting him to death, and did not find any; 56 for a great many were testifying against him falsely, and the testimonies did not tally.
57 And some stood up and testified falsely against him 58 "We heard him say ‘I will tear down this temple made by hands and in three days build another not made by hands’ "; 59 and even so their testimony did not tally.
60 And the high priest stood forward and put the question to Jesus "Do you not make any answer? what is it that these are testifying against you? " 61 but he was silent and did not make any answer.
Again the high priest put to him the question "Are you the Messiah, the Son of the Blessed? " 62 And Jesus said "I am, and you shall see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of Power and coming with the clouds of the heavens. " 63 And the high priest, tearing his tunics, said "What further need have we of witnesses? 64 you heard the blasphemy, what is your opinion? " And they all found him guilty and punishable with death.
65 And some began to spit on him and to cover up his face and strike him with their fists and say to him "Prophesy! " and the officers received him with slaps.
15:1-47
15 And at once in the morning the chief priests, with the elders and scribes and the whole Sanhedrin, got their scheme ready and bound Jesus and brought him to Pilate and handed him over to him.
2 And Pilate put the question to him, "Are you the ‘king of the Jews’? " and he answered him "As you say. " 3 And the chief priests accused him vehemently; 4 and Pilate questioned him again, "Do you not make any answer? see at what a rate they are accusing you "; 5 but Jesus no longer made any answer, so that Pilate wondered.
6 And every feast-time he used to release to them one prisoner whom they begged off.
7 And the man known as Bar-Abbas was in custody with the rioters, who had committed murder in the riot.
8 And the crowd went up and began to ask for what he used to do for them; 9 and Pilate answered them "Will you have me release for you the King of the Jews? " 10 for he was aware that it was out of jealousy that the chief priests had had him arrested.
11 But the chief priests hounded the crowd on to have him release Bar-Abbas for them instead.
12 And Pilate answered them again "Then what shall I do with the one that you call the King of the Jews? " 13 but they screamed again "Crucify him. " 14 And Pilate said to them "Why, what harm has he done? " but they screamed more and more "Crucify him. " 15 And Pilate, wishing to satisfy the crowd, released Bar-Abbas for them, but scourged Jesus and gave him in charge to be crucified.
16 And the soldiers took him inside the courtyard, that is, the praetorium; and they called together the whole cohort, 17 and dressed him in purple, and braided a wreath of thorns and put it around his head, 18 and began to salute him with "Hail, King of the Jews! " 19 and they beat his head with a reed and spat on him, and got down on their knees and did reverence to him.
20 And when they had had their fun with him, they took off the purple from him and put his own clothes on him.
And they led him out to be crucified; 21 and they requisitioned a passerby coming from the country, Simon, a Cyrenian, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to take up his cross.
22 And they brought him to the place Golgotha, which means "the Skull place "; 23 and they offered him wine with myrrh in it, but he did not take it; 24 and they crucified him and divided up his clothes, throwing lots over them, who should take what.
25 And it was at nine o’clock they crucified him.
26 And the inscription of his offense was written up, "The King of the Jews. " 27 And with him they crucified two robbers, one on his right and one on his left.
28 29 And those who went past taunted him, shaking their heads and saying "Wow! you that were tearing down the temple and building it up in three days, 30 save yourself by getting down off the cross! " 31 In the same way the chief priests too, making fun of him to each other with the scribes, said "He saved others; he cannot save himself! 32 Let the Messiah, the King of Israel, get down off the cross now, that we may see it and believe; " And those who were crucified with him twitted him.
33 And when twelve o’clock came there came a darkness all over the land till three.
34 And at three o’clock Jesus shrieked loudly "Elohí, Elohí, lamá shabaktáni? " which means "My God, my God, wherefore hast thou abandoned me? " 35 And some of those who were present said when they heard it "Hark, he is calling Eliah " [for that was the way Elijah’s name was then pronounced].
47 And Mary the Magdalene and Jose’s Mary saw where he was laid. Mark 16:1-20
3 And they were saying to each other "Who will roll away the stone for us from the door of the tomb? " 4 and they looked up and saw that the stone was rolled back.
For it was very large. 5 And they entered the tomb and saw a young man sitting on the right, clad in a white robe; and they were dismayed.
6 But he said to them "Do not be dismayed; you are looking for Jesus the Nazarene, the one who was crucified; he has risen, he is not here; there is the place where they laid him.
A WRITING SAID TO BE BY ELDER ARISTON; THE VERSES ARE NUMBERED AS PART OF THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER OF MARK
15 And he said to them "Go into the entire world and proclaim the gospel to all the creation.
16 He who believes and is baptized shall be saved, but he who disbelieves shall be condemned.
7 And they had no child, as Elisabeth was barren and both were advanced in years.
And he communicated with them by signs, and remained dumb. 23 And when his days of service were full, he went home.
30 And the angel said to her "Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God; 31 and lo, you will conceive and bear a son, and you will name him Jesus.
45 And happy is she who believed that there would be an accomplishment of what she had been told from the Lord. "
46 And Mary said "My soul is magnifying the Lord,
47 And my spirit exults in God my Savior,
48 Because he has taken notice of his servant’s obscurity. For lo, henceforth all generations shall celebrate my happy lot,
49 Because the Mighty One has done great things for me, The Mighty One, and holy is his name,
50 And his mercy is to generations and generations for those who fear him.
51 He has done mightily with his arm,
He has scattered men proud in inward thought,
52 Brought potentates down from their thrones and set lowly men on high,
53 Filled hungry men with good things and sent rich men away empty.
54 He has come to the aid of his servant Israel,
Remembering mercy, 55 as he told our fathers,
To Abraham and his issue forever. "
56 And Mary stayed with her about three months, and returned to her home.
57 And Elisabeth came to her full time for bearing, and had a son.
58 And her neighbors and relatives heard that the Lord had shown great mercy to her, and they rejoiced with her.
59 And on the eighth day they came to circumcise the child, and were naming him Zachariah after his father; 60 and his mother answered "No, he is to be named John. " 61 And they said to her "There is no one in your family who bears that name "; 62 and they made signs to his father to know what name he would wish to have given him.
63 And he asked for a tablet and wrote "His name is John "; and they all wondered.
64 And immediately his mouth was opened and his tongue liberated, and he spoke, blessing God.
65 And fear came upon all who lived in the neighborhood; and in all the highland of Judea all these matters were talked of, 66 and all who heard them laid them up in their hearts, saying "What, then, will this child be? " for the Lord’s hand was with him.
76 And you too, child, you shall be called the prophet of the Most High; for you shall go in advance of the Lord to get ready his roads, 77 to give his people knowledge of salvation in the pardoning of their sins 78 because of our God’s heart of pity, whereby a sunrise from on high 79 shall visit us to shine on those who are sitting in darkness and the shadow of death, that it may guide our feet into the way of peace. "
80 And the child grew, and strengthened in spirit, and was in the wildernesses till the day of his commission to Israel.
Luke
2:1-52
2 And in those days a decree was issued by Caesar Augustus that all the world of men should be registered.
2 (This was the first registration while Quirinius was governor of Syria.) 3 And everybody went to be registered at his own city; 4 and Joseph, among the rest, went up from the city of Nazareth in Galilee to Judea, to David’s city, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of David’s house and clan, 5 to have himself registered with Mary his wife, she being with child.
6 And while they were there she came to her full number of days for bearing, 7 and gave birth to her firstborn son and wrapped him and laid him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the lodgings.
8 And there were shepherds in that same country camping out in the fields and keeping night-watches over their flock; 9 and an angel of the Lord came and stood over them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they were greatly afraid.
10 And the angel said to them "Do not be afraid; for lo, I bring you the news of a great gladness which there shall be for all the people: 11 that there is born for you today a savior, who is the Lord Messiah, in the city of David.
12 And this is a sign for you: you shall find a wrapped baby lying in a manger. " 13 And all of a sudden there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God and saying 14 "Glory on high to God, and on earth peace among men of grace. " 15 And when the angels had gone away from them into the heavens the shepherds told each other "Let us go over to Bethlehem and see this thing that has taken place, which the Lord has made known to us. " 16 And they came in haste and hunted them up, Mary and Joseph and the baby lying in the manger; 17 and when they saw them they gave an account of the thing that had been told them about this child.
18 And all who heard it wondered over what they were told by the shepherds; 19 but Mary kept track of all these things, putting them together in her mind.
20 And the shepherds went back glorifying and praising God for all that they had heard and seen, as they had been told.
21 And when a week was full for circumcising him, he was named Jesus, the name given by the angel before he was conceived.
36 And there was a prophetess Hannah daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher (she was greatly advanced in years, having lived with a husband seven years from her maidenhood 37 and been a widow as much as eighty-four years) who never quitted the temple-precinct, worshiping night and day with fasts and prayers; 38 and she came at that very moment and stood before them and gave praise to God, and told about him to all who were watching for the redemption of Jerusalem.
39 And when they had finished everything that the law of the Lord requires, they returned to Galilee, to their own city Nazareth. 40 And the child grew and strengthened, filling with wisdom, and the grace of God was on him.
41 And his parents used to go to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the passover.
42 And when he was twelve years old, and they were going up in accordance with the custom of the feast 43 and had completed the days, at their returning the child Jesus stayed behind in Jerusalem; and his parents did not know of it, 44 but, supposing him to be in the company, went a day’s journey and looked all about for him among their relatives and acquaintances, and, 45 not finding him, returned to Jerusalem to look him up.
46 And after three days they found him in the temple-precinct sitting among the teachers and listening to them and putting questions to them; 47 and all who heard him were surprised at his insight and his answers.
48 And at seeing him they were astonished, and his mother said to him "Child, why did you do such a thing to us? here are your father and I hunting for you and suffering pain over you. " 49 And he said to them "How came it you were hunting for me? didn’t you know I must be at my Father’s? " 50 and they did not understand the word that he spoke to them.
51 And he went down with them and came to Nazareth and was under their control; and his mother kept the run of all these matters in her mind; 52 and Jesus kept growing in wisdom and height, and in favor with God and men. Luke
7 So he said to the crowds that went out to be baptized by him "Spawn of vipers, who has given you notice to flee from the future wrath? 8 Produce fruits appropriate to repentance, then, and do not begin to say to yourselves ‘We have Abraham for our father,’ for I tell you God can raise up children to Abraham out of these stones.
Luke 4:1-44
14 And Jesus returned to Galilee in the power of the Spirit; and a rumor about him went out all over the countryside.
31 And he came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and was teaching them on the sabbath, 32 and they were astonished at his teaching because his words were spoken with authority.
33 And in the synagogue there was a man under the control of an unclean demon, and he shouted out loudly 34 "Ha, what have you to do with us, Jesus, you Nazarene? have you come to destroy us?
I know you, I know who you are, the Holy One of God. " 35 And Jesus rebuked him, saying "Silence, and come out of him. "
And, after flinging him out on the floor, the demon came out of him without doing him any harm.
36 And amazement came upon them all, and they talked to each other, saying "What does this mean, that he gives orders with authority and power to the unclean spirits and they come out? " 37 and a noise about him went out to every place in the region.
38 And he rose and left the synagogue and came to Simon’s house.
And Simon’s mother-in-law was suffering with a severe fever, and they asked him to do something for her; 39 and he went and stood over her and rebuked the fever, and it left her; and immediately she got up and waited on their needs.
40 And after sunset one and all who had people sick with various diseases brought them to him; and he laid his hands on each one of them and cured them.
41 And demons also came out from many, shouting out "You are the Son of God "; and he stopped them peremptorily and would not allow them to speak, because they knew him to be the Messiah.
42 And when daylight came he went out and away to a lonely place; and the crowds went in quest of him and came to where he was, and held him back to keep him from going away from them.
43 But he said to them "I must bring word of the Reign of God to the other cities too, because that is what I was sent for. " 44 And he was making his proclamation in the synagogues of Palestine.
5:1-39
5 And while the crowd was pressing upon him and listening to the word of God, he was standing by the edge of the Lake of Gennesaret 2 and saw two boats standing at the water’s edge; but the fishermen had got out of them and were washing the nets.
3 And he got into one of the boats, which was Simon’s, and asked him to put out a little from the land; and he sat down and taught the crowds from the boat.
4 And when he stopped speaking he said to Simon "Put out to the deep water and let down your nets for a catch. " 5 And Simon answered "Master, we worked hard all night and got nothing; but at your word I will let down the nets. " 6 And they did this and enclosed a great number of fish, and their nets were tearing, 7 and they beckoned to their partners in the other boat to come and lend a hand; and they came, and filled both boats so that they were on the point of going to the bottom.
8 And at seeing it Simon Peter threw himself down at Jesus’s knees, saying "Take yourself away from me, because I am a sinful man, sir "; 9 for amazement had come over him and all who were with him at the haul of fish that they had caught, 10 and over James and John the sons of Zebedee too, who were in business with Simon.
And Jesus said to Simon "Do not be afraid; henceforth you shall be catching men. " 11 And when they had brought their boats to land they left everything and followed him.
12 And while he was in one of the cities, there there appeared a man full of leprosy; and, seeing Jesus, he threw himself down on his face and implored him, saying "Sir, if you will you can cleanse me; " 13 And he reached out his hand and touched him, saying "I will; be cleansed "; and at once the leprosy went away from him.
14 And he instructed him not to tell anybody, but "go show yourself to the priest and make the offerings on account of your cleansing as Moses directed, for an attestation to them. " 15 But the talk about him spread all the more, and great crowds came together to hear and to be cured of their sicknesses; 16 but he kept out of the way in lonely places and prayed.
17 And on one of the days he was teaching, and there were Pharisees and teachers of the law sitting by who had come from every village in Galilee and Judea and Jerusalem, and there was power of the Lord for his healing, 18 and men arrived bringing on a couch a man who was paralyzed; and they tried to bring him in and lay him before him, 19 and, not finding any way to bring him in because of the crowd, they got up on the roof and let him down through the tiles, cot and all, into the middle before Jesus.
20 And, seeing their faith, he said "Man, you are forgiven for your sins. " 21 And the scribes and the Pharisees began to question, saying "Who is this that speaks blasphemies? who can forgive sins but God alone? " 22 But Jesus, recognizing their questionings, answered them "Why are you inwardly questioning? 23 which is easier, to say ‘you are forgiven for your sins’ or to say ‘rise and walk’? 24 But, that you may know that the Son of Man has authority to forgive sins on earth " said he to the paralyzed man, "I say to you, Rise, and take up your cot and go home. " 25 And immediately he stood up before them and took up what he had been lying on, and went off to his home glorifying God.
26 And surprise came over them one and all, and they glorified God, and were filled with fear, saying "We have seen strange things today. "
27 And after this he went out and observed a customhouse officer, Levi by name, sitting in the customhouse office, and said to him "Follow me "; 28 and he left everything and rose and followed him.
29 And Levi gave a great banquet for him in his house: and there was a great crowd of customhouse officers and so on who were at the table with them, 30 and the Pharisees and their scribes complained to his disciples "Why do you eat and drink with customhouse officers and people of bad character? " 31 And Jesus answered them "Not the able-bodied, but the ill, need a physician; 32 I have not come to call saints, but sinners, to repentance. "
33 And they said to him "John’s disciples fast frequently and make prayers, and so do those of the Pharisees, but yours eat and drink. " 34 But Jesus said to them "Can you make the wedding guests fast while the bridegroom is with them? 35 but there will come days, and when the bridegroom is taken from them, then they will fast in those days. " 36 And he told them a parable too: "Nobody cuts a patch from a new cloak and sews it on an old cloak; if one does, he will be cutting the new one and the patch from the new one will not match the old one.
37 And nobody puts new wine in old skins; if one does, the new wine will burst the skins, and it will run out and the skins will be wasted; 38 but new wine is to be put in fresh skins.
39 And nobody when he has been drinking old wine wants new; for he says ‘The old is best.’ "
6:1-49
6 And on a sabbath it befell that he was walking through grainfields and his disciples were picking and eating the ears, rubbing them down in their hands.
2 But some of the Pharisees said "Why are you doing what is not lawful on the sabbath? " 3 And Jesus replied to them "Have you not even read this that David did when he, and those who were with him, were hungry? 4 that he went into the house of God and took and ate the showbread, and gave it to those who were with him, which it is not lawful that anybody but the priests alone should eat? " 5 and he said to them "The Son of Man is master of the sabbath. "
6 And on another sabbath it befell that he went into the synagogue and was teaching; and there was a man there whose right hand was shriveled.
7 And the scribes and the Pharisees were watching him to see if he cured on the sabbath, that they might find a chance to arraign him; 8 but he knew their designs.
And he said to the man with his hand shriveled "Rise and stand forward "; and he got up and stood.
9 And Jesus said to them "I put the question to you whether it is lawful on the sabbath to do good or to do harm, to save a life or to kill "; 10 and he looked around at them all and said to him "Stretch out your hand "; and he did, and his hand was restored.
11 But they were seized with fatuity, and talked together of what they should do to Jesus.
12 And in those days it befell that he went out on the mountainside to pray, and spent the whole night in prayer to God; 13 and when day came he called his disciples to him, and, choosing out twelve of them, the same whom he named apostles, 14 Simon, the same whom he named Peter, and his brother Andrew, and James and John and Philip and Bartholomew 15 and Matthew and Thomas and James the son of Alpheus, and Simon known as the Zealot, 16 and Judas the son of James, and Judas Iscarioth who turned traitor, 17 and coming down with them, he took his stand in a level place, he and a great crowd of his disciples, and a great multitude of the people from all Palestine and Jerusalem and the Tyre and Sidon coast, who came to hear him and be healed from their diseases; 18 and those who were molested by unclean spirits were cured; 19 and all the crowd were trying to get a chance to touch him, because a power went out from him and healed all.
20 And he raised his eyes to his disciples and said
"Happy you that are poor, because yours is the Reign of God.
21 Happy you that are hungry now, because you shall be fed to the full.
Happy you that weep now, because you shall laugh.
22 Happy are you when men hate you and when they ostracize you and twit you and proscribe your name as vile on account of the Son of Man.
23 On that day be glad and dance, for your reward in heaven is great; for their fathers did the same sort of things to the prophets.
24 Woe to you that are rich though, because you have had your comforting.
25 Woe to you that are filled now, because you shall be hungry.
Woe, you that laugh now, because you shall mourn and weep.
26 Woe when all men speak well of you, for their fathers did the same sort of thing to the pretended prophets.
27 "But I tell you who hear me, love your enemies, do good turns to those who hate you, 28 bless those who curse you, pray for those who do spiteful things to you; 29 to him who cuffs you on the cheek offer the other cheek too, and from him who takes away your cloak do not withhold your shirt either; 30 give to everybody who asks you, and do not demand your things back from the one who takes them; 31 and as you would have men do to you, do likewise to them.
32 And if you love those who love you, what credit is it to you? for sinners too love those who love them.
33 And if you do good to those who do good to you, what credit is it to you? sinners too do the same.
34 And if you lend to those from whom you hope to receive, what credit is it to you? sinners too lend to sinners to receive payment in full.
35 But do love your enemies, and do good and lend without hoping to get any payment; and your reward shall be great, and you shall be sons of the Most High, because he is kind to the ungrateful and wicked.
36 Be tenderhearted, as your Father is.
37 And do not be judging, and you shall not be judged; and do not condemn, and you shall not be condemned.
Release and you shall be released; 38 give and you shall have gifts given to you; good measure, pressed in, shaken down, running over, they will give into your lap.
For the measure that you measure out shall be measured back to you. "
39 And he also told them a parable: "Can a blind man guide a blind man? will they not both tumble into a pit? 40 a pupil is not above his teacher, but everyone thoroughly trained will be like his teacher.
41 And why is it that you can see the particle of straw in your brother’s eye, but do not observe the beam of timber in your own eye? 42 how can you say to your brother ‘Brother, let me get out the particle in your eye,’ when you cannot see the timber in your own eye?
Hypocrite, first get the timber out of your eye, and then you will have good eyesight to get out the particle in your brother’s eye.
43 For there is no such thing as a good tree producing foul fruit, nor yet a foul tree producing good fruit; 44 for each tree is known by its particular fruit; for people do not pick figs off thorns, nor gather grapes off a bramble.
45 A good man brings forth a good thing out of the good stock in his heart, and a bad man out of the bad a bad thing; for what his mouth speaks comes out of what is overflowing in his heart.
46 "And why do you call me ‘Sir,’ ‘Sir,’ and not do what I say? 47 Everyone who comes to me and hears my words and does them, I will let you know whom he is like: 48 he is like a man building a house, who dug deep and laid a foundation on the rock, and when a flood came the river dashed against that house and was not able to shake it, because it was built well.
49 But he who hears and does not do is like a man who built a house on the earth without a foundation, against which the river dashed, and at once it fell in and was a total wreck. "
7:1-50
7 After he had finished speaking all his words in the hearing of the people, he came into Capernaum.
2 And a certain centurion’s servant, whom he prized highly, was ill and ready to die; 3 and, hearing about Jesus, he sent to him elders of the Jews, asking him to come and save his servant’s life; 4 and they came to Jesus and appealed to him earnestly, saying "He deserves to have you do this for him; 5 for he loves our nation, and it was he who built us the synagogue. " 6 And Jesus went with them.
But when he was now not far from the house the centurion sent friends to him with the message "Sir, do not put yourself out, for I am not fit to have you come under my roof 7 that is the reason why I did not presume to come to you myself but say the word, and let my boy be healed.
8 For I too am a man in a position under authority, with soldiers under me; and I say to this one ‘Go,’ and he goes; and to another ‘Come,’ and he comes; and to my servant ‘Do this,’ and he does it. " 9 And Jesus, hearing this, wondered at him, and turned and said to the crowd that was following him "I tell you, I have not found so much faith even in Israel. " 10 And the men that had been sent to him returned to the house and found the servant well.
11 And before long he went to a city named Nain, and his disciples and a great crowd were going along with him; 12 and when he drew near the gate of the city, there was a man being carried out dead who was his mother’s only son, and she was a widow; and there was quite a crowd from the city with her.
13 And at seeing her the Lord was sorry for her and said to her "Do not weep, " 14 and went up and touched the coffin; and the bearers stopped, and he said "Young man I am speaking to you rise! " 15 and the dead man sat up and began to speak; and he gave him to his mother.
16 And fear came over them all, and they glorified God, saying "a great prophet has arisen among us " and "God has visited his people "; 17 and this talk about him went out all over Palestine and all its neighborhood.
18 And John’s disciples reported to him about all this; 19 and John called to him two disciples of his and sent them to the Lord with the message "Are you the Coming One or are we to expect another? " 20 And the men came to him and said "John the Baptist has sent us to you to ask, are you the Coming One or are we to expect another? " 21 Thereupon he cured many of diseases and defects and evil spirits, and granted sight to many blind men, 22 and answered them by saying "Go and report to John what you saw and heard: blind men are recovering their sight, cripples are walking, lepers are being cleansed and deaf men are hearing, dead men are being raised, poor men are being given the gospel; 23 and happy is anyone who is not staggered over me. "
24 And when John’s messengers had gone Jesus began to say to the crowds about John "What did you go out into the wilderness for? to gaze at reeds shaking in the wind? 25 But what did you go out for? to see a man robed in soft fabrics? for those who are in magnificent clothing and in luxury, go to royal palaces.
26 But what did you go out for? to see a prophet?
Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet; 27 this is he of whom it is written ‘Lo, I am sending before your face my messenger who shall prepare your road before you.’ 28 I tell you, among all that are born of women no one is greater than John; but the littlest in the Reign of God is greater than he.
29 And all the people and the customhouse officers, when they heard, justified God, receiving John’s baptism; 30 but the Pharisees and the legists set aside God’s plan for themselves, not receiving baptism from him.
31 To what, then, shall I compare the men of this generation, and what are they like? 32 they are like children sitting in the marketplace and calling out to each other, that say ‘We played to you and you did not dance, we lamented and you did not weep.’ 33 For John the Baptist has come not eating bread nor drinking wine, and you say ‘He has a demon’; 34 the Son of Man has come eating and drinking, and you say ‘Here is a gormandizer and a drinker, a friend of customhouse officers and people of bad character’; 35 and wisdom is justified by all her children. "
36 And one of the Pharisees asked him to eat with him, and he went into the Pharisee’s house and took a place at the table.
37 Now a sinful woman in the city, having ascertained that he was at the table in the Pharisee’s house, got an alabaster vial of perfume 38 and stood behind him by his feet weeping, and began to wet his feet with her tears and wiped them off with the hair of her head, and kept kissing his feet and rubbing them with the perfume.
39 And when the Pharisee that had invited him saw it he thought to himself "If this man were a prophet he would know who and what the woman that is touching him is, that she is a sinner. " 40 And Jesus answered him "Simon, I have something to say to you. "
And he said "Say it, sir. " 41 "Once upon a time there was a lender who had two debtors: the one owed five hundred denarii and the other fifty.
42 As they were not able to pay, he gave them both a release.
Then which of the two will love him the most? " 43 Simon answered "I suppose, the one to whom he gave the release for most. "
And he said to him "You judge rightly. " 44 And, turning to the woman, he said to Simon "Do you see this woman?
I came into your house; you did not give me water for my feet; but she wetted my feet with her tears and wiped them off with her hair.
45 You did not give me a kiss; but she has kept kissing my feet without a pause ever since I came in.
46 You did not put oil on my head; but she has been putting perfume on my feet.
47 For which reason I tell you her many sins are forgiven; because she has loved much, but he who is forgiven little loves little. " 48 And he said to her "Your sins are forgiven "; 49 and those who were at the table with him began to say to themselves "Who is this that even forgives sins? " 50 But he said to the woman "Your faith has saved you; go, and good betide you. "
8:1-56
8 And thereafter he was making a tour city by city and village by village, preaching and bringing word of the Reign of God, and with him the Twelve 2 and certain women who had been cured of evil spirits and sickness, Mary known as the Magdalene, from whom seven demons had come out, 3 and Johanna the widow of Herod’s superintendent Chuzas, and Susanna, and many others, who supplied the men’s needs out of their property, 4 and as a great crowd was coming together, and the people from city after city were flocking to him, he said in a parable 5 "The sower went out to sow his seed.
And in his sowing some fell on the roadside and was trampled on, and the birds of the air ate it up; 6 and some more dropped on the rock, and after it came up it dried out because of not having any moisture; 7 and some more fell among the thorns, and the thorns came up with it and smothered it; 8 and some more fell on the good soil, and after it came up it produced a hundredfold crop. "
Saying this, he called out "Let him who has ears to hear, hear! "
9 And his disciples put the question to him what that parable stood for; 10 and he said "To you it is given to know the secrets of the Reign of God; but to the rest it is in parables, that when they see they may not see and when they hear they may not understand.
11 But this is what the parable stands for.
The seed is the word of God; 12 and the ones on the roadside are those who hear and then the devil comes and takes away the word from their hearts, that they may not believe and be saved; 13 and the ones on the rock are those who, when they hear, accept the word with joy, while they have no root who believe temporarily and quit in testing-time; 14 and what fell among the thorns, these are the ones who hear, and, as they go on, are stifled by life’s anxieties and riches and pleasures, and do not ripen a crop; 15 and what was in soil that was all right, these are those who hear and retain the word in a right and good heart, and bear their crop by holding out.
16 "But nobody after lighting a lamp covers it with a jar or sets it under a couch, but sets it on a stand so that those who enter can see the light.
17 For there is no secret thing that will not be laid open, nor a thing concealed that shall not be found out and brought to light.
18 So look out how you hear; for to one who has, more shall be given, and from one who has not, even what he seems to have shall be taken away. "
19 And his mother and his brothers came to him, and could not get at him because of the crowd; 20 and he was told "Your mother and your brothers are standing outside wanting to see you. " 21 But he answered them "My mother and my brothers, they are those who listen to God’s word and do it. "
22 And on one of the days he and his disciples had got into a boat, and he said to them "Let us go across to the other side of the lake, " and they started; 23 and during the passage he fell asleep.
And a squall of wind came down on the lake, and they were getting swamped and were in danger; 24 and they approached him and roused him up, saying "Master, master, we are lost. "
But when he was roused he rebuked the wind and the surging of the water, and they stopped and there was a calm.
25 And he said to them "Where is your faith? "
And they were afraid and wondered, saying to each other "Who then is this, that he gives orders to the winds and the water and they obey him? " 26 And they came to land in the country of the Gerasenes, which is on the opposite side from Galilee.
27 And when he had landed there met him a certain man out of the city who had demons, and had not for a considerable time had on a garment, and did not stay in a house but in the tombs.
28 And at seeing Jesus he screamed out and threw himself down before him and said in a loud voice "What have I to do with you, Jesus, Son of the Most High God?
I beg you, do not torture me "; 29 for he was enjoining the unclean spirit to come out of the man.
For at many times it had seized him, and he used to be manacled with fetters and chains and kept under guard, and he would burst the fastenings and be driven to the wildernesses by the demon. 30 And Jesus put the question to him "What is your name? " and he said "Brigade, " because many demons had entered him.
31 And they were appealing to him not to order them to go to the abyss.
32 Now there was there a considerable herd of hogs feeding on the mountainside; and they appealed to him to permit them to enter those; and he gave them permission, 33 and the demons came out of the man and entered the hogs, and the herd bolted down the steep bank into the lake and were drowned.
34 And the men who were tending them, at seeing what had happened, ran away and reported it in the city and in the fields; 35 and they came out to see what had happened, and came to Jesus and found the man from whom the demons had come out sitting at Jesus’s feet, clothed and sane, and they were afraid.
36 And those who had seen it reported to them how the demon-ridden man had been brought to himself.
37 And the entire populace of the region of the Gerasenes asked him to go away from their country, because they were under the strain of a great fear; and he got into a boat and returned.
38 And the man from whom the demons had come out begged to be with him; but he dismissed him, saying 39 "Return home and tell what things God has done for you "; and he went off through the whole city proclaiming what things Jesus had done for him.
40 And at Jesus’s return the crowd was there to welcome him; for they were all expecting him.
41 And there came a man whose name was Jair and he was a director in the synagogue and threw himself down at Jesus’s feet and appealed to him to come to his house, 42 because he had an only daughter, about twelve years old, and she was dying.
And while he was on the way the crowds were suffocating him; 43 and a woman who had been having a flow of blood for twelve years, who had not succeeded in getting cured by anybody, 44 came up behind and touched the tassel of his cloak, and immediately her flow of blood stopped.
45 And Jesus said "Who was it that touched me? " but everybody denied it, while Peter said "Master, the crowds are hemming you in and crushing you. " 46 But Jesus said "Somebody touched me; for I felt that a power had gone out from me. " 47 And the woman, seeing that she had not escaped notice, came trembling and threw herself down before him and told him before all the people the reason why she touched him, and how she was healed immediately; 48 and he said to her "Daughter, your faith has made you well; go, and good betide you. "
49 While he was still speaking, someone came from the director’s house saying "Your daughter is dead; do not put the teacher out anymore. " 50 But Jesus, hearing it, answered him "Do not be afraid, only believe, and she shall get well. " 51 And when he came to the house he would not let anyone go in with him but Peter and John and James and the girl’s father and mother.
52 And everybody was weeping and wailing for her; but he said "Do not weep, she is not dead but asleep. " 53 And they laughed at him, knowing that she was dead.
54 But he grasped her hand and called "Girl, rise "; 55 and her spirit came back, and she stood up immediately; and he directed that she should be given something to eat.
56 And her parents were astounded; but he instructed them to tell nobody what had taken place.
9:1-62
9 And he called together the Twelve and gave them power and authority over all demons and to cure diseases, 2 and sent them to proclaim the Reign of God and to heal, 3 and said to them "Do not take anything for the journey, neither a walking-stick nor a wallet nor bread nor money, nor have two shirts to a man.
4 And whatever house you go into, stay there and come out from there.
5 And whatever people do not receive you, in coming out of that city shake off the dust from your feet for an attestation against them. " 6 And they went out and went along through the villages, preaching the gospel and curing people of sickness everywhere.
7 And the tetrarch Herod heard of all that was going on, and was puzzled, because it was said by some that John had risen from the dead, and by some that Elijah had appeared, 8 and by others that some old-time prophet had arisen.
9 But Herod said "John I beheaded; but who is this about whom I hear such things? " and tried to get a chance to see him.
10 And the apostles returned and told him the story of everything they had done; and he took them and withdrew with them by himself to a city named Bethsaida.
11 But the crowds, finding it out, followed him; and he made them welcome and spoke to them about the Reign of God, and healed those who needed a cure.
12 But the day began to decline; and the Twelve came to him and said to him "Dismiss the crowd, so that they may go to the villages and farmlands round about and get lodged and find provisions, because here we are in an uninhabited place. " 13 But he said to them "Give them something to eat yourselves. "
And they said "We have no more than five cakes of bread and two fishes, unless it is for us to go and buy eatables for all these people " 14 for there were about five thousand men.
But he said to his disciples "Have them lie down by groups of about fifty each "; 15 and they did so, and got them one and all lying down.
16 And he took the five cakes and the two fishes, and looked up to the sky and blessed them and broke them up and gave them to the disciples to set before the crowd; 17 and they all ate and had their fill, and there were taken up what they had of fragments left over, twelve baskets.
18 And there was a time, while he was praying in private, that the disciples were with him and he put the question to them "Who do the crowds say I am? " 19 And they answered "John the Baptist and others, Elijah and others, that one of the old-time prophets has arisen. " 20 And he said to them "And who do you say I am? "
And Peter answered "God’s Messiah. " 21 But he peremptorily enjoined them not to tell this to anyone, 22 saying that the Son of Man must suffer a great deal, and be rejected by the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and rise on the third day.
23 And he said to all "If anyone wishes to come after me, let him repudiate himself and take up his cross daily and follow me.
24 For whoever wishes to save his self will lose it; but whoever loses his self on my account, he will save it.
25 For what good will a man get by making a profit of the whole world and a loss of himself? 26 For whoever is ashamed of me and my words, of him the Son of Man will be ashamed when he comes in his glory and his Father’s and the holy angels’.
27 But I tell you truly, there are some of those who stand here who shall not taste death till they see the Reign of God. "
28 And about a week after these things he took with him Peter and John and James and went up on the mountainside to pray.
29 And while he was praying the look of his face became different and his clothes flashing white; 30 and lo, there were two men talking with him; it was Moses and Elijah, 31 who, appearing in glory, spoke of his departure which he was to consummate at Jerusalem.
32 But Peter and those who were with him were weighed down with sleep, but when they waked up they saw his glory and the two men that were standing with him.
33 And while those were parting from him Peter said to Jesus "Master, it is a good thing we are here: let us make three booths, one for you and one for Moses and one for Elijah " not knowing what he was saying.
34 And as he was saying these things there was a cloud, and it overshadowed them; and they were afraid when they entered the cloud.
35 And there came a voice out of the cloud, "This is my chosen son: listen to him. " 36 And as the voice came, Jesus alone was to be found.
And they kept silence and did not report any of the things they had seen to anybody in those days.
37 And when they came down off the mountain on the next day he encountered a great crowd; 38 and a man shrieked out from the crowd "Teacher, I beg you to take notice of my son, because he is the only one I have, 39 and here a spirit takes him and all of a sudden he screams, and it convulses him and raises a foam, and it is with great difficulty that it can be got to come away from him, breaking him all to pieces; 40 and I begged your disciples to expel it and they could not. " 41 And Jesus answered "O unbelieving and perverse generation, how long shall I be among you and bear with you? bring your son here. " 42 But even while he was coming the demon struck him down and threw him into a convulsion; but Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit and healed the boy and gave him back to his father.
43 And all were astonished at the grandeur of God.
But while all were wondering at all that he was doing he said to his disciples 44 "Lodge these words in your ears: for the Son of Man is to be given up into the hands of men. " 45 But they did not know what to make of this saying, and it was veiled from them so that they should not apprehend it; and they were afraid to ask him about this saying.
46 And the question came up among them which of them was greatest.
47 But Jesus, knowing their inward questioning, took a child and had it stand at his side, 48 and said to them "Anybody who receives this child in my name is receiving me, and anybody who receives me is receiving him who sent me; for he who is smallest among you all, he is greatest. "
49 And John answered "Master, we saw somebody expelling demons in your name and we stopped him because he does not follow with us. " 50 But Jesus said to him "Do not stop him, because he who is not against us is for us. "
51 And when the days for his being taken up came around, he set his face to go to Jerusalem 52 and sent messengers ahead of him; and they went, and came into a village of Samaritans to make preparations for him; 53 and they did not receive him, because he was headed toward Jerusalem.
54 And when the disciples James and John saw it they said "Sir, will you have us say the word for fire to come down out of the sky and consume them? " 55 But he turned and rebuked them, 56 and they went to another village.
57 And while they were going along somebody said to him on the road "I will follow you wherever you go. " 58 And Jesus said to him "The foxes have dens and the birds of the air perches, but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head. "
59 And he said to another "Follow me "; but he said "Permit me first to go and bury my father. " 60 And he said to him "Leave the dead to bury their dead, but for your part go and advertise the Reign of God. "
61 And still another said "I will follow you, sir; but first permit me to bid farewell to the people at home. " 62 But Jesus said to him "Nobody who puts his hand to a plow and looks back is fit for the Reign of God. "
10:1-42
10 And after this the Lord designated seventy-two others and sent them out ahead of him two by two to every city and place where he himself was going to come.
2 And he said to them "The harvest is great, but the workers are few; so beg the owner of the harvest to send out workers to his harvest.
3 Go; here I am sending you out like lambs among wolves.
4 Carry no purse, no wallet, no shoes, and salute no one on the road.
5 And whatever house you enter, first say ‘Peace to this house’; 6 and if there be a man for peace there, your peace shall rest upon him, but if not it shall come back to you.
7 And stay in that same house, eating and drinking what they furnish, for a worker deserves his pay.
Do not move from house to house.
8 And whatever city you come into and they receive you, eat what is set before you, 9 and cure the sick in it, and say to them ‘The Reign of God is almost upon you.’ 10 And whatever city you come into and they do not receive you, come out into its main streets and say 11 ‘We wipe off the very dust that has stuck to our feet out of your city; know this though, that the Reign of God is almost here.’ 12 I tell you it will be more bearable for Sodom in that day than for that city.
13 Woe to you, Chorazin! woe to you, Bethsaida! because if the miracles that have been done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon they would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes; 14 it will be more bearable for Tyre and Sidon at the judgment, though, than for you.
15 And you, Capernaum, are you to be lifted up to heaven? you are to go down to the world of the dead.
16 He who listens to you is listening to me, and he who disregards you is disregarding me; and he who disregards me is disregarding him who sent me. "
17 And the seventy-two returned with joy, saying "Sir, even the demons submit to us at your name. " 18 But he said to them "I saw Satan fall from heaven like lightning.
19 Lo, I have empowered you to tread upon snakes and scorpions and on all the Enemy’s power, and nothing shall injure you.
20 Do not rejoice at this, though, that the spirits submit to you; but rejoice because your names are enrolled in heaven. "
21 At that same time he exulted in the Holy Spirit and said "I give thee praise, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou didst conceal these things from the wise and discerning and disclose them to infants; yes, Father, because such was thy pleasure.
22 Everything has been committed to me by my Father; and no one knows who the Son is except the Father, nor who the Father is except the Son and he to whom the Son chooses to disclose him. " 23 And he turned to his disciples and said to them by themselves "Happy are the eyes that see what you see; 24 for I tell you many prophets and kings wanted to see what you see and to hear what you hear, and did not. "
25 And up stood a legist to put him to a test, saying "Teacher, what should I do to inherit eternal life? " 26 And he said to him "What is written in the law? what do you read? " 27 And he answered "You shall love the Lord your God out of all your heart, and with all your soul and with all your strength and with all your mind, and your neighbor as yourself. " 28 And he answered him "You have answered right: do this and you shall live. " 29 But he, wanting to vindicate himself, said to Jesus "And who is my neighbor? " 30 Jesus rejoined "Once upon a time a man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and he fell among robbers; who stripped him and gave him a clubbing, and went off leaving him half dead.
31 And by chance a certain priest was going down by that road, and saw him and went past on the other side.
32 And similarly a Levite came to the place and saw and went past on the other side.
33 But a certain wayfaring Samaritan came where he was, and saw him and was moved to pity, 34 and went up to him and bandaged his wounds, pouring on oil and wine; and he set him on his own beast and brought him to an inn and took care of him.
35 And in the morning he pulled out two denarii and gave them to the landlord and said ‘Take care of him, and what more you spend I will pay you when I am coming back.’ 36 Which of these three do you think showed himself neighbor to the man who had fallen among the robbers? " 37 And he said "The one that did him the kindness. "
And Jesus said to him "Go and do like that yourself. " 38 And once while they were traveling along he had come into a village, and a woman, Martha by name, had taken him into her house; 39 and this woman had a sister named Mary, who had seated herself at the Lord’s feet and was listening to his words; 40 but Martha was having to bustle this way and that with a great deal to be done for the guests.
And she came and stood before him and said "Sir, do you not care that my sister has left me to attend to things alone? so tell her to take hold and help me. " 41 But the Lord answered her "Martha, Martha, you are fretting and getting worried about many things, 42 but what is wanted is only a few, or one.
For Mary has chosen the good portion, which will not be taken away from her. "
11:1-54
11 And as he was in a certain place praying, one of his disciples said to him when he ceased "Sir, teach us to pray, the same as John taught his disciples. " 2 And he said to them "When you pray, say ‘Father, may thy name be kept holy, thy reign come; 3 give us our next day’s bread day by day.
4 And forgive us our sins, for so do we forgive everyone who owes us anything.
And do not have us fall under temptation.’ "
5 And he said to them "Which of you shall have a friend and go to him at midnight and say to him ‘Friend, lend me three cakes of bread, 6 since a friend of mine has arrived at my house and I have nothing to set before him,’ 7 and he shall answer from inside ‘Do not bother me; the door is locked now, and my children are in the bed with me; I cannot get up and give you anything’ 8 I tell you, even if he shall not get up and give him anything because of being his friend, for his unashamedness he will rise and give him whatever he wants.
9 And I tell you, ask and you will have things given to you; look and you will find; knock and you will be opened to; 10 for every asker receives, and the seeker finds, and the knocker will be opened to.
11 And which of you that is a father will his son ask for a fish and he hand him a snake instead of a fish? 12 or ask for an egg and he hand him a scorpion? 13 So if you, being bad, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father from heaven give Holy Spirit to those who ask him! "
14 And he was expelling a demon, a dumb one, and when the demon had gone out the dumb man spoke.
And the crowds wondered; 15 but some of them said "It is by Beelzebul the head of the demons that he expels the demons, " 16 and others, to test him, tried to get from him a token out of heaven.
17 But he, knowing their ideas, said to them "Any kingdom that is divided against itself is laid waste, and house falls upon house.
18 And if Satan too is divided against himself how shall his kingdom be kept up? since you say it is by Beelzebul that I expel the demons.
19 But if it is by Beelzebul that I expel the demons, by whom do your sons expel them? accordingly they shall be your judges.
20 But if I expel the demons by the finger of God, then the Reign of God has overtaken you.
21 When a strong man, armed, guards his own premises, his property is in safety; 22 but when a stronger man comes on and defeats him he takes from him the weapons and armor in which he had trusted, and gives away the spoils.
23 He who is not with me is against me, and he who does not gather with me scatters.
24 When an unclean spirit comes out of a man it goes through waterless tracts looking for a resting-place, and upon not finding one it says ‘I will return to my home that I came from’; 25 and when it gets there it finds it swept and put in order; 26 then it goes and takes with it seven other spirits viler than itself, and they go in and live there, and that man’s last stage comes to be worse than his first. "
27 And while he was saying this, a woman in the crowd raised her voice and said to him "Happy the body in which you were carried, and the breasts that you sucked! " 28 But he said "Nay, happy are those who listen to God’s word and live up to it. "
29 And while the crowds were collecting round him he began to say "This generation is a wicked generation; it is looking for a token and will be given none but the token of Jonah; 30 for as Jonah was a token to the Ninevites, so will the Son of Man be to this generation.
31 The queen of the south shall indict the men of this generation and convict them, because she came from the ends of the earth to listen to Solomon’s wisdom, and now here is more than Solomon.
32 The men of Nineveh shall indict this generation and convict it, because they repented at Jonah’s proclamation and now here is more than Jonah.
33 Nobody after lighting a lamp puts it in a cupboard or under the peck measure, but on the stand, that those who step in may see the glow.
34 Your eye is the body’s lamp: when your eye is free your whole body too is light, but when it is mean your body too is dark.
35 So be looking to see whether the light in you is not darkness.
36 If, then, your body is all light, not having any part dark, it shall be all light as when the lamp lights you with its blaze. "
37 And while he was speaking a Pharisee asked him to lunch with him; and he went in and took his place at the table.
38 And at seeing this the Pharisee wondered that he had not first dipped in water before lunch.
39 But the Lord said to him "At present you Pharisees clean the outside of the cup and the plate, but your inside is full of rapacity and rascality.
40 Silly men, did not the maker of the outside make the inside too? 41 Instead, give in charity what is in the dishes, and you have everything clean. 42 But woe to you Pharisees, because you tithe the mint and the rue and every vegetable and you slight justice and the love of God; but you ought to have done these and not let those slip.
43 Woe to you Pharisees, because you love the first seat in synagogues, and greetings in the marketplaces.
44 Woe to you because you are like unmarked tombs that men walk over without knowing it. "
45 And one of the legists answered him "Teacher, in saying these things you are insulting us too. " 46 But he said "Woe to you too, you legists, because you load men down with loads hard to carry and do not touch the loads yourselves with one of your fingers.
47 Woe to you because you build the tombs of the prophets, and your fathers killed them; 48 you are witnesses, then, and approve of your fathers’ deeds, because they killed them and you build.
49 Accordingly God’s wisdom has said ‘I will send among them prophets and apostles, and some they will kill and will persecute, 50 that this generation may answer for the blood of all the prophets, shed since the foundation of the world, 51 from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zachariah who perished between the altar and the house:’ yes, I tell you, this generation shall answer for it.
52 Woe to you legists, because you have taken away the key of knowledge; you did not go in yourselves and you prevented those who were going in. "
53 And when he came out from there the scribes and the Pharisees began to be savagely hostile and to quiz him about numerous things, 54 watching him for a chance to snap up something out of his mouth;
12:1-59
12 during which the crowds gathered round by tens of thousands so that they trampled each other, and he began to say to his disciples "First and foremost beware of Pharisee yeast; that is, hypocrisy.
2 But there is nothing covered up that will not be uncovered, or secret that will not be found out; 3 on the contrary, whatever you have said in the dark will be heard in the light, and what you have spoken into someone’s ear in the closets will be proclaimed on the roofs.
4 And I say to you friends of mine, do not fear those who kill the body and after that are not able to do anything further; 5 but I will let you know whom to fear fear him who has authority after killing to send to hell: yes, I tell you, fear him.
6 Why, sparrows are sold nine for twopence, and not one of them is forgotten before God, 7 but even the hairs of your heads are all counted.
Do not fear, you are more important than a great many sparrows.
8 But I tell you, everyone who acknowledges me before men the Son of Man will in his turn acknowledge before the angels of God, 9 but he who repudiates me before men will be disowned before the angels of God; 10 and everyone who says a thing against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but he who blasphemes against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven.
11 But when they bring you in before synagogues and governments and authorities, do not fret over how you shall make your defense or what it shall be or what you shall say; 12 for the Holy Spirit will teach you at the moment what you must say. "
13 And one of the crowd said to him "Teacher, tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me. " 14 But he said to him "Man, who has set me as a judge or divider over you? " 15 And he said to them "See that you keep clear of all overreaching, because it is not by having an oversupply that one has his living out of his property. "
16 And he told them a parable: "Once upon a time a rich man’s lands bore a great crop, 17 and he was going over the question to himself ‘What shall I do, because I have nowhere to put my crops when I gather them?’ 18 and he said ‘This is what I will do: pull down my barns and build larger ones, and put all my wheat and the rest of my good things in them, 19 and say to my soul "Soul, you have a great stock of good things laid up for years: rest, eat, drink, be gay "’; 20 but God said to him ‘Silly man, this night your soul is to be called for, and who will have what you have got ready?’ 21 That is what the man is like who lays by for himself and is not rich toward God. "
22 And he said to his disciples "For this reason I tell you, do not fret over your soul what you shall eat, nor over your body what you shall put on; 23 for the soul is more than the food, and the body than the garment.
24 Observe the ravens, that they neither sow nor reap, they who have no storeroom nor barn, and God feeds them: how much more important you are than the birds! 25 And which of you by fretting can add a foot to his height? 26 so if you cannot do even a trifling thing why do you fret about the rest? 27 Observe the lilies, how they neither spin nor weave, but, I tell you, not even Solomon in all his glory was clad like one of these.
28 But if in the field God so attires the plants, that are there today and are thrown in a firepot tomorrow, how much more he will you, little-faiths! 29 And do not you be seeking things to eat and to drink, and do not be nervous; 30 for the nations of the world hunt after all this, but your Father knows that you want this.
31 But do seek his Reign, and you will have this added.
32 "Do not be afraid, little flock; because your Father has been pleased to give you the kingship.
33 Sell your property and give charity: make yourselves purses that do not grow old, an inexhaustible store in heaven where thief does not come near and moth does not spoil; 34 for where your stores are, there your heart too will be.
35 Let your loins be girded and your lamps lighted, 36 and you like men watching for their master, for the time when he comes away from the wedding, that when he comes and knocks they may open to him at once.
37 Happy are those servants whom the master, when he comes, shall find awake: I tell you verily he will put on an apron and send them to the table and come and wait on them.
38 And if he comes in the second watch and finds them so, and if in the third, happy are they.
39 But be sure of this, that if the man of the house had known at which hour the thief was coming he would not have let his house be broken into.
40 Be ready yourselves, because it will be at the hour when you are not thinking of it that the Son of Man comes. "
41 And Peter said "Sir, are you telling this parable with reference to us ourselves or to everybody? " 42 And the Lord said "Who, then, is the intelligent faithful steward whom the master will set over his help to give them their rations punctually? 43 Happy is that servant whom his master, when he comes, shall find doing thus: 44 I tell you truly he will set him over all his property.
45 But if that servant says to himself ‘My master is late about coming’ and begins to beat the men and the maids, and to eat and drink and get drunk, 46 that servant’s master will come on a day when he does not expect it and at an hour that he does not know, and will cut him up and allot him a part among the faithless; 47 and that servant who knew his master’s wishes and did not get things ready or do in accordance with his wishes will have many strokes of the whip, 48 but the one who did not know and did things that deserve whipping will have few; and everyone to whom much was given will be called on for much, and on him to whom they entrusted most they will make most of a demand.
49 "I came to throw out fire on the earth, and how I wish it was already kindled! 50 And I have a water to plunge in, and what a pressure I am under till it is done! 51 Do you think I have come to give peace on earth? no, I tell you, but disunion.
52 For from now on five in one family will be parted three against two and two against three; 53 they will part so that father will be against son and son against father, mother against daughter and daughter against her mother, mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law and daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law. "
54 And to the crowds too he said "When you see a cloud rising in the west, at once you say ‘there is a shower coming,’ and so it does; 55 and when you see the wind in the south you say ‘there will be a scorcher,’ and there is.
56 You hypocrites, you know enough to judge of the face of the earth and the face of the sky, how is it you fail to judge of these times? 57 And why do you not of yourselves decide on the right? 58 While you are going with your antagonist to appear before a magistrate, make it an object to get clear of him on the road, for fear he should drag you to the judge and the judge should hand you over to the officer and the officer should put you in prison: 59 I tell you, you shall not get out from there till you pay the very last copper. "
13:1-35
13 And at that very time there were some present who reported to him about the Galileans whose blood Pilate had mixed with their sacrifices; 2 and he answered them "Do you think these Galileans had been bigger sinners than any of the Galileans, that they suffered this 3 no, I tell you, but if you do not repent all of you will perish similarly.
4 Or those eighteen on whom the tower fell in Siloam and killed them, do you think they had more of an account standing against them than any of the people that live in Jerusalem? 5 no, I tell you, but if you do not repent you will all perish in the same way. "
6 And he told this parable: "A man had a fig-tree planted in his orchard, and came looking for fruit on it and did not find any.
7 And he said to the orchardman ‘Here it is three years since I have been coming to look for fruit on this tree and not finding any: cut it away, what is it keeping the land idle for into the bargain?’ 8 And he answered him ‘Sir, let it be this one year more till I dig around it and put in manure; 9 and if it does produce fruit for the coming year well, if not, you shall cut it away.’ "
10 And he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the sabbath, 11 and there was a woman who had had a sickness-spirit eighteen years, and was bent over and unable to stand perfectly erect.
12 And Jesus, seeing her, called out to her and said "Woman, you are released from your sickness, " 13 and laid his hands on her; and immediately she straightened up and glorified God.
14 But the director of the synagogue, taking offense at Jesus’s having cured on the sabbath, answered by saying to the crowd "There are six days in which work ought to be done: so come in them and be cured, and not on the sabbath day. " 15 But the Lord answered him "Hypocrites, does not each of you on the sabbath untie his ox or ass from the manger, and lead it away and water it? 16 and ought not this woman, a daughter of Abraham whom Satan had tied up these eighteen years, to be untied from this tether on the sabbath day? " 17 And as he said this all his opponents were put to shame, and all the crowd rejoiced over all the magnificent things that were being done by him.
18 So he said "What is the Reign of God like, and to what shall I compare it? 19 it is like a grain of mustard which a man took and dropped into his garden, and it grew and became a tree, and the birds of the air perched in its branches. "
20 And again he said "To what shall I compare the Reign of God? 21 it is like a bit of yeast which a woman took and hid in forty quarts of flour till it all grew yeasty. "
22 And he was passing through city after city and village after village teaching and traveling toward Jerusalem, 23 and someone said to him "Sir, are there few who are saved? " and he said to them 24 "Push to get in through the narrow gate; because, I tell you, a great many will try to get in and not be able.
25 After the head of the house rises and shuts the door, and you begin to stand outside and knock on the door, saying ‘Open to us, sir,’ and he shall answer you ‘I do not know you to tell where you are from,’ 26 then you will begin to say ‘We have eaten and drunk before you, and you have taught in our streets’; 27 and he will tell you ‘I do not know where you are from: take yourselves away from me, all you doers of wrong.’ 28 There will the weeping and the grinding of teeth be, when you see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets in the Reign of God and yourselves put out.
29 And they will come from east and west and from north and south and go to the table in the Reign of God; 30 and there are last who will be first and there are first who will be last. "
31 At that moment certain Pharisees approached him saying "Go out and away from here, because Herod is wanting to kill you. " 32 And he said to them "Go and tell that fox ‘I am expelling demons and performing cures today and tomorrow, and the third day I come to my consummation.
33 I must go on my way, though, today and tomorrow and the next day, because it is not possible that a prophet should perish outside Jerusalem.
34 Jerusalem, Jerusalem, killer of the prophets and stoner of those that are sent to her how many times I have wished to gather her children as a bird gathers her brood under her wings, and you would not! 35 Lo, your house is left to you.
And I tell you, you shall not see me until there comes the time when you say ‘Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.’ "
14:1-35
14 And when he came into the home of one of the heads of the Pharisees on a sabbath to eat a meal, they were watching him, 2 and there before him was a man with the dropsy.
3 And Jesus answered by saying to the legists and Pharisees "Is it lawful on the sabbath to cure, or not? " 4 but they made no move.
And he took him and healed him and dismissed him, 5 and said to them "Which one of you, if his son or his steer falls into a well, will not at once pull him out on the sabbath day? " 6 And they were not able to reply to that.
7 And he told the guests a parable, noticing how they were choosing the first places at the table: 8 "When you are invited to a wedding by anybody, do not take the first place, for fear there may have been invited by him a man of more account than you, 9 and the one who invited you and him shall come and say to you ‘Make room for this man,’ and then you will begin to occupy the last place with humiliation; 10 but when you are invited go and take the last place, in order that when the one who has invited you comes he may say to you ‘Friend, come further up’ then it will redound to your honor before all who are at the table with you.
11 For everyone who lifts himself up will be put down, and he who puts himself down will be lifted up. "
12 And he also said to the one who had invited him "When you give a lunch or a dinner, do not call your friends nor your brothers nor your relatives nor rich neighbors, for fear they should return the invitation themselves and you should have a compensation; 13 but when you give a banquet invite poor men, maimed men, cripples, blind men, 14 and happy shall you be, because they are not able to compensate you; for you shall be compensated at the resurrection of the righteous. "
15 And one of his fellow-guests heard this and said to him "Happy is he who shall eat bread in the Reign of God. " 16 But he said to him "Once upon a time there was a man who gave a great dinner and invited many; 17 and he sent his servant at the hour for the dinner to tell the invited guests ‘Come, it is ready now.’ 18 And right off they all began to excuse themselves: the first said to him ‘I have bought a field and am obliged to go out and see it; pray excuse me’; 19 and another said ‘I have bought five yoke of oxen and am on my way to see what they are worth; pray excuse me’; 20 and another said ‘I have got married and consequently cannot come’; 21 and the servant came and reported it to his master.
Then the host was angry, and said to his servant ‘Go right out to the streets and alleys of the city and bring the poor and maimed and crippled and blind in here.’ 22 And the servant said ‘Sir, what you ordered has been done and there is still room.’ 23 And the master said to the servant ‘Go out to the highways and hedges and make people come in, so that my house shall be full; 24 for I tell you none of those guests that were invited shall taste my dinner.’ "
25 And great crowds were going along with him, and he turned and said to them 26 "If one comes to me and does not hate his father and mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters, and his own self besides, he cannot be a disciple of mine.
27 Whoever does not carry his cross and come after me cannot be a disciple of mine.
28 For which of you, if he wants to build a tower, does not first sit down and calculate the expense, whether he has enough for carrying it through, 29 for fear lest when he has laid a foundation and is not able to complete it everybody who sees this should begin to make fun of him 30 and say ‘That man began to build and was not able to complete it’? 31 Or what king, marching to join battle with another king, will not sit down and deliberate as to whether with ten thousand he is in a condition to meet the one who is coming against him with twenty thousand? 32 and if not, while he is still a long way off he sends an embassy and asks for terms of peace.
33 So in the same way anyone of you who does not bid farewell to all his property cannot be my disciple.
34 "Salt is a good thing, then, but if the very salt loses its strength with what shall it be seasoned? 35 it is not desirable either on land or on a manure-heap: they throw it outside.
Let him who has ears to hear hear! "
15:1-32
15 And all the customhouse officers and the people of bad character were nearing him to listen to him; 2 and the Pharisees and the scribes went to talking and said "This man receives people of bad character and eats with them. " 3 But he told them this parable: 4 "What man among you, having a hundred sheep and losing one of them, does not leave the ninety-nine in the wilderness and go after the lost one till he finds it? 5 and upon finding it he joyfully takes it on his shoulder, 6 and when he gets home he calls together his friends and his neighbors, saying to them ‘Rejoice with me because I have found my lost sheep.’ 7 I tell you, just so there will be rejoicing in heaven over one repenting sinner more than over ninety-nine saints who are in no need of repentance.
8 Or what woman, having ten drachmas, if she loses one does not light a lamp and sweep the house and look carefully till she finds it? 9 and upon finding it she calls together her friends and neighbors, saying ‘Rejoice with me because I have found the drachma I lost.’ 10 Just so, I tell you, there is a rejoicing before the angels of God over one repenting sinner. "
11 And he said "Once upon a time there was a man who had two sons, 12 and the younger of them said to his father ‘Father, give me my share of the property.’
And he apportioned his means between them; 13 and after not many days the younger son got everything together and went off to a distant country, and there he scattered his property in a life of dissipation.
14 And when he had spent everything there came a hard famine in that country, and he began to be in want 15 and went and fastened himself upon one of the citizens of that country; and he sent him to his fields to tend hogs.
16 And he was wishing he could fill his stomach with the pods that the hogs ate, and nobody gave him anything.
17 But he came to himself and said ‘How many hired men of my father’s have bread enough and to spare, and I am starving to death here! 18 I will be going, and go to my father, and say to him "Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you, 19 I no longer deserve to be called your son; make me like one of your hired men "’; 20 and he set out and came to his father.
But when he was still far off his father saw him, and his heart was moved, and he ran and threw himself on his neck and went to kissing him.
21 And his son said to him ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you, I no longer deserve to be called your son’ 22 but the father said to his servants ‘Bring the best robe out quick and put it on him, and give us a ring for his hand and sandals for his feet; 23 and bring the stall-fed calf, kill it, and let us eat and have a gay time, 24 because my son here was dead and has come back to life, he was lost and has been found.’
And they began to be gay.
25 But his older son was in the field; and when in coming home he drew near the house he heard a bagpipe and dancing, 26 and he called one of the servants and inquired what that might be.
27 And he told him ‘Your brother has come, and your father has killed the stall-fed calf because he had got him back safe and sound’; 28 and he was angry and would not go in.
And his father went out and pleaded with him; 29 but he answered his father ‘Here have I been slaving for you so many years, and never went against a command of yours, and you never gave me a kid to have a gay time with my friends; 30 but when this son of yours who has been eating up your means with prostitutes came, you killed the stall-fed calf for him.’ 31 But he said to him ‘My boy, you are with me always, and everything of mine is yours; 32 but we had to have a glad gay time because this brother of yours had been dead and came to life, had been lost and was found.’ "
16:1-31
16 And he also said to the disciples "Once upon a time there was a rich man who had a steward, and word was passed to him that the steward was throwing away his property; 2 and he called him and said to him ‘What is this I hear about you? hand in the accounts for your stewardship, for you cannot be steward any longer.’ 3 And the steward said to himself ‘What shall I do, since my master is taking away the stewardship from me?
I am not able to dig, I am ashamed to beg.
4 I know what I will do, so that when I am turned out of the stewardship they will receive me into their homes’; 5 and he called each of his master’s debtors to him and said to the first ‘How much do you owe my master?’ 6 and he said ‘A thousand gallons of oil,’ and he said to him ‘Here is your note; sit right down and write "five hundred. "’ 7 Then he said to another ‘And how much do you owed?’ and he said ‘A thousand bushels of wheat.’
He said to him ‘Here is your note; write "eight hundred. "’ 8 And the master praised the fraudful steward for having done sagaciously, because the sons of the times are more sagacious than the sons of light for their own generation.
9 And I tell you, get friends for yourselves out of fraudful money, that when it gives out they may receive you into the eternal habitations.
10 He who is faithful about a trifle is also faithful about a great thing, and he who is fraudulent about a trifle is also fraudulent about a great thing.
11 So if you have not proved faithful about fraudulent money who will entrust you with the real? 12 and if you have not proved faithful about a thing of somebody else’s, who will give you your own? 13 No domestic can belong to two masters, for he will either hate the one and love the other or be attentive to the one and despise the other: you cannot belong to God and money. "
14 And the Pharisees, being money-lovers, heard all this and sneered at him; 15 and he said to them "You are the ones who make yourselves out righteous before men, but God knows your hearts; because what is lofty among men is an abomination before God.
16 There was the law and the prophets until John; since then the gospel of the Reign of God is being preached and everybody is pushing into it.
17 But it is easier for the heavens and the earth to pass away than for the dot of one i in the law to drop away.
18 Everyone who divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery, and so does he who marries a divorced woman.
19 "But once upon a time there was a rich man, and he used to wear purple and lawn in a round of gaiety and splendor day after day.
20 And a poor man, Lazarus by name, lay sick on the ground at his gate, ulcerated 21 and wishing he could have a meal out of what dropped on the floor from the rich man’s table; yes, and the dogs too came and licked over his sores.
22 Well, the poor man died, and he was carried off to Abraham’s bosom by the angels.
And the rich man died too, and was buried; 23 and in the world of the dead, being in tortures, he raised his eyes and saw Abraham in the distance, and Lazarus in his bosom.
24 And he called out ‘Father Abraham, take pity on me and send Lazarus to dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue, because I am in pain in this flame’; 25 but Abraham said ‘My child, remember that you had your good things paid over during your life, and Lazarus his bad likewise; but now here he is comforted and you are in pain.
26 And withal between us and you there is planted a great gulf so that those who want to go over from here to you may not be able, and that they may not cross from there to us.’ 27 And he said ‘Then, father, pray send him to my family 28 (for I have five brothers) to testify to them, that they may not also come to this place of torture’; 29 but Abraham said ‘They have Moses and the prophets, let them listen to them.’ 30 And he said ‘No, father Abraham, but if someone from the dead goes to them they will repent’; 31 but he told him ‘If they do not listen to Moses and the prophets, they will not be satisfied even if someone rises from the dead.’ "
17:1-37
17 And he said to his disciples "It is impossible for trippings-up not to come, but woe to him through whom they come! 2 it would pay him if he had a millstone round his neck and were thrown into the sea, sooner than that he should trip up one of these little ones; 3 beware!
If your brother sins rebuke him, and if he repents forgive him; 4 and if he sins against you seven times a day and turns back to you seven times saying ‘I am sorry’ you shall forgive him. "
5 And the apostles said to the Lord "Give us more faith. " 6 But the Lord said "Had you faith like a mustard-seed, you would say to this sycamine tree ‘Be uprooted and planted in the sea’ and it would have obeyed you.
7 But which of you is there who, if he has a servant plowing or tending sheep, will say to him when he comes in from the field ‘Come on and have dinner at once’ 8 and not ‘Get something ready for my dinner, and put on your apron and wait on me till I have eaten and drunk, and after that you shall eat and drink yourself’? 9 is he thankful to the servant because he has done what was prescribed? 10 So with you: when you have done everything that was prescribed to you, say ‘We are inefficient servants it was what we were in duty bound to do that we did.’ "
11 And while he was on his way to Jerusalem he was passing between Samaria and Galilee, 12 and as he came into a certain village he met with ten leprous men, who stopped and stood far off; 13 and they lifted their voice in the cry "Jesus, master, take pity on us. " 14 And, seeing it, he said to them "Go and show yourselves to the priests "; and as they went they were cleansed.
15 And one of them, upon seeing that he was healed, returned glorifying God in a loud voice, 16 and threw himself down on his face at Jesus’s feet thanking him; and he was a Samaritan.
17 And Jesus answered by saying "Why, the ten were cleansed: where are the nine? 18 were there not any found that returned to give glory to God except this alien? " 19 And he said to him "Stand up and go on your way; your faith has made you well. "
20 And, having the question "When is the Reign of God to come? " put to him by the Pharisees, he answered them "The Reign of God is not to come under watching, 21 and they will not say ‘Here it is’ or ‘there’; for the place to find the Reign of God is within you. "
22 And he said to the disciples "There will come days when you will desire to see one of the days of the Son of Man and will not, 23 and they will say to you ‘Off there,’ ‘Right here’ do not go; do not chase after them.
24 For as the lightning flashing from one horizon shines to the other, so will the Son of Man be in his day.
25 But first he must suffer a great deal, and be rejected by this generation.
26 And as it was in Noah’s days, so it will be in the Son of Man’s too: 27 they were eating, drinking, marrying, until the day that Noah went into the ark and the flood came and destroyed them all.
28 Or again, as it was in Lot’s days, they were eating, drinking, buying, selling, planting, building, 29 but on the day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and sulfur from the sky and destroyed them all, 30 it will be the same on the day that the Son of Man is disclosed.
31 On that day let him who is on the roof, and his things in the house, not go down to take them; and so he who is in the field, let him not turn back 32 remember Lot’s wife! 33 Whoever tries to keep his soul alive will lose it, and whoever loses it will have it alive.
34 I tell you, that night there will be two on one couch, the one will be taken along and the other left; 35 there will be two women grinding in company, the one will be taken along and the other left. " 36 37 And they answered him "Where, sir? "
And he said to them "Where the body is is where the vultures will gather around. "
18:1-43
18 And he told them a parable of which the point was that they must always pray and never give up: 2 "Once upon a time there was in a certain city a judge who did not fear God nor care for public opinion.
3 And there was a widow in that city, and she came to him saying ‘Avenge me on the man I have a case against’; 4 and he would not for a while, but after that he said to himself ‘Even if I do not fear God nor care for public opinion, 5 because of the way this woman worries me I will avenge her, that she may not make a show of me with coming forever.’ " 6 And the Lord said "Hear what the unjust judge says; 7 and shall not God do vengeance for his chosen, who clamor to him day and night and he has patience over them? 8 I tell you he will do vengeance for them soon.
Yet when the Son of Man comes will he find faith on earth? "
9 And he also told this parable, pointed at certain self-righteous people who scorned the rest: 10 "Two men went up to the temple-precinct to pray, the one a Pharisee and the other a customhouse officer.
11 The Pharisee took his stand and made this prayer, talking to himself: ‘O God, I thank thee that I am not as the rest of mankind are, grasping, dishonest, adulterous, or else like this customhouse officer: 12 I fast twice a week, I tithe everything I get’; 13 but the customhouse officer stood at a distance and would not even raise his eyes toward heaven, but beat his breast saying ‘O God, be friendly to sinful me.’ 14 I tell you, this man, rather than the other, went down to his home justified; because everyone who lifts himself up will be put down, and he who puts himself down will be lifted up. "
15 And they brought the babies to him to have him touch them; but the disciples, seeing it, rebuked them.
16 But Jesus called the babies to him, saying "Let the children come to me and do not interfere with them; for to such belongs the Reign of God.
17 I tell you verily, anyone who does not receive the Reign of God like a child shall not get into it. "
18 And a certain ruler put the question to him "Good teacher, what should I do to inherit eternal life? " 19 But Jesus said to him "Why do you call me good? nobody is good except one, God.
20 You know the commandments, ‘Do not commit adultery, do not commit murder, do not steal, do not testify falsely, honor your father and mother.’ " 21 But he said "All this I have observed ever since my youth. " 22 And Jesus, hearing that, said to him "One thing you still lack: sell everything you have and distribute the money to the poor, and you will have a fund laid by in heaven; and come and follow me. " 23 But at hearing this he grew sad, for he was very rich.
24 And Jesus, seeing him, said "What hard work the wealthy will have to go into the Reign of God! 25 for it is easier for a camel to get through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to get into the Reign of God. " 26 And those who heard it said "And who can be saved? " 27 but he said "What is impossible with men is possible with God. " 28 And Peter said "We here did leave our own and follow you. " 29 And he said to them "I tell you verily there is no one who has left a house or a wife or brothers or parents or children on account of the Reign of God 30 who shall not receive many times as much in this time and in the coming age eternal life. "
31 And he took the Twelve with him and said to them "Here we are going up to Jerusalem, and everything that has been written through the prophets will be accomplished to the Son of Man.
32 For he will be handed over to the foreigners and abused and outraged and spit upon, 33 and they will flog him and kill him, and on the third day he will rise. " 34 And they did not understand any of these things; and this word was hidden from them, and they did not know what he was talking of.
35 And as he drew near Jericho a blind man was sitting by the roadside begging, 36 and, hearing a crowd going along, inquired what that was; 37 and they told him that Jesus the Nazarene was coming along.
38 And he made an outcry, "Jesus, son of David, take pity on me! " 39 And those who were going ahead rebuked him, telling him to be quiet; but he cried out more and more "Son of David, take pity on me! " 40 And Jesus halted and ordered him brought to him; and when he came near he put the question to him 41 "What do you want me to do for you? "
And he said "Sir, that I may have my eyesight back. " 42 And Jesus said to him "Have your eyesight back; your faith has made you well, " 43 and immediately he recovered his sight and followed him, glorifying God.
And all the people, seeing it, gave praise to God.
19:1-48
19 And he came into Jericho and was passing through.
2 And there was a man named Zaccheus he was a head officer of the customhouse, and was rich 3 who was trying to see Jesus and see what he was like, and could not in consequence of the crowd because he was a small-sized man; 4 and he ran ahead and got up into a sycamore tree to see him, because he was to pass that way.
5 And when Jesus came to the place he looked up and said to him "Zaccheus, come right down, for I must stay at your house tonight. " 6 And down he came and gladly took him in.
7 And at seeing it everybody went to talking and saying "He has gone in to lodge with a man of bad character. " 8 But Zaccheus stood and said to the Lord "Half my property, sir, I give to the poor, and whatever I have got out of anybody by blackmail I give back fourfold. " 9 And Jesus said to him "Today salvation for this house has come, as he too is a son of Abraham.
10 For the Son of Man has come to look for what was lost and save it. "
11 And while they were listening to this he added a parable because he was near Jerusalem and they thought the Reign of God was to come out immediately; 12 he said "Once upon a time a man of high birth went to a distant country to get a kingship and to return; 13 and he called ten servants of his and gave them ten minas of silver and said to them ‘Go into business till I come’; 14 but the citizens of his country hated him and sent after him an embassy with the message ‘We are not willing to have this man reign over us.’ 15 And when he had got the kingship and came back he gave the word to have those servants to whom he had given the money called, that he might know what each had made in his business.
16 And the first presented himself saying ‘Sir, your mina has earned ten minas more’; 17 and he said to him ‘Well done, good servant; because you were faithful about a trifle, have authority over ten cities.’ 18 And the second came saying ‘Your mina, sir, has made five minas’; 19 and to him also he said ‘You too be over five cities.’ 20 And another came saying ‘Sir, here is your mina, which I have been keeping laid up in a handkerchief; 21 for I was afraid of you because you are a stiff man, you take up what you did not put down and harvest what you did not sow.’ 22 He said to him ‘I will judge you out of your own mouth, you villain; you knew I am a stiff man, taking up what I did not put down and harvesting what I did not sow, 23 and why did you not put my money in a bank? and when I came I should have collected it with interest.’ 24 And he said to those who were present ‘Take the mina away from him and give it to the one with the ten minas.’ 25 (And they said to him ‘Sir, he has ten minas.’) 26 ‘I tell you everyone who has shall have more given to him, but from him who has not there shall be taken away even what he has.
27 As for those enemies of mine, though, who did not want to have me reign over them, bring them here and kill them before me.’ " 28 And, saying this, he went forward on his way up to Jerusalem.
29 And when he came near to Bethphage and Bethany at what is known as the Mount of Olives, he sent two of the disciples, 30 saying "Go to the village opposite, where as you are entering you will find a colt hitched, on which no man has ever yet sat; and untie it and bring it.
31 And if anybody asks you what you are untying it for, you are to say like this: ‘Because the Lord needs it.’ " 32 And those who were sent went off, and found things as he had said to them; 33 and when they were untying the colt its owners said to them "Why are you untying the colt? " 34 but they said "Because the Lord needs it " 35 and brought it to Jesus, and they threw their cloaks over the colt and had Jesus mount it; 36 and as he went on they spread their cloaks underneath in the road.
37 And when he was nearing the descent of the Mount of Olives the entire body of disciples began to praise God loudly and joyously for all the miracles they had seen, 38 saying "Blessed is he who comes, the King, in the name of the Lord! Peace in heaven,
and glory on high! " 39 And some of the Pharisees said to him out of the crowd "Teacher, rebuke your disciples "; 40 and he answered "I tell you, if these are silent the stones will shout. "
41 And when he came near, at seeing the city he wept over it, 42 saying "If you too had known this day what were the conditions of peace! but now they have been hidden from your eyes 43 because there will come upon you days that your enemies will throw up entrenchments against you and encircle you and hem you in on every side, 44 and they will dash you to the ground and your children in you, and not leave stone on stone in you, in return for your not knowing your time of visitation! "
45 And he went into the temple-precinct and began to turn out those who were selling, 46 saying to them "It is written ‘And my house shall be a house of prayer’; but you have been making it a robbers’ cave. "
47 And he taught in the temple-precinct day by day.
But the chief priests and the scribes, as well as the leading laymen, were looking for a chance to make away with him, 48 and could not find anything to do, for the entire people was hanging on his words.
20:1-47
20 And on one of the days, as he was teaching the people in the temple-precinct and giving them the gospel, in came the chief priests and the scribes, with the elders, 2 and said to him "Tell us by what authority you are doing these things, or who it was that gave you this authority. " 3 But he answered them "I will ask you a question myself tell me, 4 was John’s baptizing from heaven or from men? " 5 And they made a calculation, saying to themselves "If we say ‘From heaven’ he will say ‘Why did you not believe him?’ 6 but if we say ‘From men’ the whole people will stone us to death, for they are persuaded that John was a prophet "; 7 and they answered that they did not know where it was from, 8 and Jesus said to them "And neither do I tell you by what authority I am doing these things. "
9 And he began to tell the people this parable: "A man set out a vineyard and rented it to farmers, and went abroad for a considerable time; 10 and in due season he sent a servant to the farmers to have them give him some of the produce of the vineyard; but the farmers gave him a beating and sent him off empty-handed.
11 And he went on to send another servant; but him too they beat and insulted and sent off empty-handed.
12 And he went on to send a third, but this one too they wounded and drove out.
13 And the owner of the vineyard said ‘What shall I do?
I will send my dear son, perhaps they will have some respect for him.’ 14 But at seeing him the farmers talked up a plan among them, saying ‘This is the heir; let us kill him, that the inheritance may be ours’; 15 and they put him out of the vineyard and killed him.
So what will the owner of the vineyard do to them? 16 he will come and kill off these farmers, and give the vineyard to others. "
And at hearing it they said "Perish the thought! " 17 But he looked at them and said "Then what is this that is written, ‘The stone that the builders condemned, that stone has come to be the top of the corner’? 18 Everyone who falls on that stone will be mangled; but him on whom it falls it will scatter to the winds. "
19 And the scribes and the chief priests tried to lay hands on him on the spot, and were afraid of the people, for they perceived that he had aimed the parable at them; 20 and they watched their chance and sent emissaries, who pretended to be honest men, to get a hold on him by his talk so as to have him arrested by the authority of the governor’s administration; 21 and they put the question to him "Teacher, we know you are straightforward in what you say and teach, and show no fear or favor, but teach the way of God in good faith: 22 is it lawful for us to pay taxes to Caesar or not? " 23 But, seeing into their duplicity, he said to them 24 "Show me a denarius.
Whose portrait and inscription does it have? "
And they said "Caesar’s. " 25 And he said to them "Well, then, pay what is Caesar’s to Caesar and what is God’s to God. " 26 And they were not able to get a hold on him before the people by any phrase; and they wondered at his answer, and kept silence.
27 And some of the Sadducees (those who deny that there is any such thing as resurrection) approached him and put the question to him 28 "Teacher, Moses wrote for us, if one’s brother dies having a wife, and is childless, that his brother should take his widow and set up a posterity for his brother.
29 So there were seven brothers, and the first took a wife and died childless, 30 and the second 31 and the third took her, and in the same way the seven of them left no children and died.
32 Afterward the woman died too.
33 So at the resurrection which of them is the woman to be wife to? for the seven had her as wife. " 34 And Jesus said to them "The children of this world marry, 35 but those who are held worthy to enjoy that world and the resurrection from the dead do not; 36 for they cannot any longer die either, but are equal to the angels, and are children of God, being children of the resurrection.
37 But that the dead are raised even Moses informs us, in the part about the bush, when he speaks of the Lord as the God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob 38 but he is not the God of dead men but of living men, for all live to him. " 39 And some of the scribes answered "Well said, teacher "; 40 for they no longer dared to put any question to him.
41 And he said to them "How is it that they say the Messiah is to be a son of David? 42 for David himself says in the Book of Psalms ‘The Lord said to my lord "Sit at my right hand 43 till I make your enemies a footstool for your feet "; 44 so David calls him lord, and how is he going to be his son?’ "
45 And in the hearing of all the people he said to his disciples 46 "Beware of the scribes, who want to go in robes and are fond of greetings in the marketplaces and the first seats in synagogues and the first places at dinners, 47 those who eat up widows’ houses and make a pretense of long prayers; these shall receive more of a sentence. "
21:1-38
21 And he looked up and saw the rich men who were dropping their gifts into the treasury.
2 And he saw a certain poverty-stricken widow drop two mites there, 3 and said "I tell you truly this poor widow dropped in more than any: 4 for all these dropped into the gifts part of what they had to spare, but she out of her want dropped in all she had to live on. "
5 And when some were saying of the temple-precinct that it was adorned with blocks of beautiful stone and works of art, 6 he said "As to this that you see, days will come in which there will not be one stone left on another that will not be torn down. " 7 And they put the question to him "Then, teacher, when will this be and what will be the sign when this is to take place? " 8 And he said "Look out that you be not misled; for many will come under my name, saying ‘I am he’ and ‘The time is at hand’; do not go after them.
9 And when you hear of wars and disorders, do not be terrified; for these things have to go first, but the end does not come at once. "
10 Then he said to them "Nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom; 11 and there will be great earthquakes, and in one place and another pestilences and famines; and there will be sights of terror, and out of the sky great portents.
12 But before all this they will lay hands on you and persecute you, arresting you and taking you to synagogues and prisons, haling you before kings and governors because of my name.
13 It will turn out an attestation for you.
14 So fix it in your minds not to study a defense beforehand; 15 for I will give you eloquence and wisdom which all your opponents cannot confront or controvert.
16 And you will be arrested at the instigation of parents and brothers and relatives and friends, and they will have some of you put to death, 17 and you will be hated by all because of my name; 18 and not a hair of your heads shall be lost.
19 In your endurance you shall get your souls.
20 "But when you see Jerusalem encircled by camps, then know that her desolation has drawn near.
21 Then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains, and let those who are in the midst of her pass out and those who are in the country not go into her; 22 because those are days of vengeance, for all that is written to be fulfilled.
23 Woe to those who are pregnant and nursing in those days! for there will be great distress in the land and wrath against this people, 24 and they will fall by the edge of the sword and be carried off to all the nations as captives, and Jerusalem will be trodden underfoot by the nations, until the times of the nations have run their full course.
25 "And there will be tokens in sun and moon and stars, and on the earth excitement of nations bewildered with the noise and swell of the sea, 26 while men faint for fear and expectation of the things that are coming upon the world of men; for the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
27 And then will they see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with great power and glory.
28 But when these things begin to take place straighten up and raise your heads, because your redemption is drawing near. "
29 And he told them a parable: "See the fig-tree, and all the trees; 30 when they are leaving out you know for yourselves by seeing it that summer is now near; 31 so you too, when you see these things taking place, are to know that the Reign of God is near.
32 I tell you verily that this generation shall not pass away till all has taken place.
33 The heavens and the earth shall pass away, but my words shall not.
34 But beware, for fear your hearts should be weighed down with dissipation and drunkenness and the anxieties of living, and that day should be upon you suddenly, 35 like a trap; for it shall come upon all that dwell on the face of all the earth.
36 But keep on the alert at every time, praying that you may succeed in escaping all these things that are to come to pass, and in presenting yourselves before the Son of Man. "
37 And through the days he was in the temple-precinct teaching, but for the nights he went out and found quarters on what is known as the Mount of Olives; 38 and all the people came early to the temple-precinct to listen to him.
22:1-71
22 And the feast of the matzoth, known as the passover, was drawing near; 2 and the chief priests and the scribes were trying to find out how to take his life, for they were afraid of the people.
3 And Satan entered Judas known as the Iscariot, who was of the number of the Twelve, 4 and he went and talked with the chief priests and provosts about how to put him into their hands; 5 and they were glad and engaged to give him money.
6 And he pledged himself to it, and went to looking for a good opportunity for putting him into their hands without a crowd.
7 And Matzoth Day came, when the passover was to be sacrificed; 8 and he sent off Peter and John, telling them "Go and get the passover ready for us, so that we may eat it. " 9 And they said to him "Where will you have us get it ready? " 10 And he told them "Well, when you enter the city you will encounter a man carrying a pitcher of water; follow him into the house that he enters.
11 And you will say to the man of the house ‘The teacher says to you "Where is my room where I am to eat the passover with my disciples? "’ 12 and he will show you a large upper room, all spread; make our preparations there. " 13 And they went and found things as he had told them, and got ready the passover.
14 And when the hour came he came to the table, and the apostles with him.
15 And he said to them "I specially desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer; 16 for I tell you, I shall eat it no more until it is fulfilled in the Reign of God. " 17 And upon receiving a cup he gave thanks over it and said "Take this and divide it among you; 18 for I tell you, from this time on I will not drink of the produce of the vine till the Reign of God comes. " 19 And he took a cake of bread, and gave thanks and broke it and gave it to them, saying "This is my body.
20 21 Yet here is my betrayer’s hand on the table with mine; 22 because the Son of Man goes in accordance with what is ordained, yet woe to that man through whom he is put under arrest! " 23 and they began to discuss between themselves which of them it might be that was to commit this deed.
24 And they also got into a wrangle as to which of them was regarded as the greatest; 25 but he said to them "The kings of the nations play the owner with them, and those who govern them are called Benefactors; 26 not so you, but let the greatest one among you take the position of a junior, and the leader that of a waiter on the rest.
27 For which is greater, the diner or the waiter? is not the diner? but I am in the position of waiter among you.
28 But you are the ones who have stayed by me in my temptations, 29 and I invest you, as my Father did me, with kingship, 30 so as to have you eat and drink at my table in my Reign; and you shall sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
31 Simon, Simon, Satan has been demanding to have you and the others surrendered to him to sift like wheat, 32 but I have been praying for you that your faith may not give out; and do you, when once you have come back, brace up your brothers. " 33 And he said to him "Sir, with you I am ready to go either to prison or to death "; 34 but he said "I tell you, Peter, there will not a cock crow today till you have three times disavowed knowing me. "
35 And he said to them "When I sent you out without purse and wallet and shoes, did you run short of anything? "
And they said "Nothing. " 36 And he said to them "But now let him who has a purse take it, and the same with a wallet, and let him who has none sell his cloak and buy a sword; 37 for I tell you that this that is written must come true for me, ‘and he was counted with lawbreakers’ for what is about me is coming true. " 38 And they said "Sir, here are two swords "; and he said to them "It is enough. "
39 And he came out and went, in accordance with his habit, to the Mount of Olives; and the disciples followed him.
40 And when he came to the place he said to them "Pray that you may not fall under temptation "; 41 and he moved about a stone’s throw away from them, and, going down on his knees, prayed 42 "Father, if you are willing, pass by me with this cup; yet not my will but yours be done. " 43 [And there appeared to him an angel from heaven strengthening him.
44 And he fell into a quiver of excitement, and prayed more ardently; and his sweat became like gouts of blood running down to the ground.] 45 And, rising from his prayer, he came to the disciples and found them sleeping for grief, 46 and said to them "Why do you go to sleep? stand up and pray, that you may not fall under temptation. "
47 While he was still speaking, in came a crowd, with the man who was known as Judas Iscarioth, one of the twelve, going in front of them; and he drew near to Jesus to kiss him.
48 But Jesus said to him "Judas, are you bringing the police on the Son of Man with a kiss? " 49 And his companions, seeing what was coming next, said "Sir, shall we take to the sword? " 50 and one or another of them struck at the high priest’s servant and took off his right ear.
51 But Jesus answered "Allow this much " and touched the ear and healed him.
52 And Jesus said to those chief priests and provosts of the temple-precinct and elders who had come to help take him "You come out as if it were against a robber, with swords and sticks; 53 when I was with you in the temple-precinct day by day you did not lift your hands against me, but this is your moment, under the license of darkness. "
54 And they arrested him and led him off, and brought him to the high priest’s house.
And Peter followed at a distance; 55 and when they had kindled a fire in the middle of the courtyard and sat down together, Peter sat in the midst of them; 56 and a certain maid, seeing him sitting in the light, fixed her eyes on him and said "This one was with him too "; 57 but he denied it, saying "I do not know him, woman. " 58 And after a short time another servant saw him and said "You are one of them too "; but Peter said "Man, I am not. " 59 And when about one hour had elapsed someone else said positively "To a certainty this one was with him too for he is a Galilean "; 60 but Peter said "Man, I do not know what you are talking about "; and immediately, while he was still speaking, a cock crowed, 61 and the Lord turned and looked at Peter.
And Peter was reminded of the Lord’s words, how he had said to him "Before a cock crows you will disown me three times "; 62 and he went outside and wept bitterly.
63 And the men who had him under arrest beat him for fun, 64 and would cover him up and put the question to him "Prophesy, who was it that hit you? " 65 and many other taunts they uttered against him.
66 And when day came the council of elders of the people assembled, both chief priests and scribes, and took him before their session, saying 67 "If you are the Messiah, tell us so "; but he told them "If I tell you you will not believe, 68 and if I ask you questions you will not answer; 69 but from this time on the Son of Man shall be seated at the right hand of the power of God. " 70 And they all said "So you are the son of God? "
And he said to them "As you say, I am. " 71 And they said "What further need have we of testimony? for we ourselves have heard from his own mouth. "
23:1-56
23 And the entire body of them stood up and brought him to Pilate.
2 And they began to accuse him, saying "We have found this man inciting our nation to disloyalty and keeping them from paying taxes to Caesar, and asserting himself to be King Messiah. " 3 And Pilate asked him "Are you the ‘king of the Jews’? " and he answered him "As you say. " 4 And Pilate said to the chief priests and the crowds "I do not find anything punishable in this man. " 5 But they said more and more positively "He agitates the people, teaching all over Palestine, beginning from Galilee and clear to here. "
6 But Pilate, hearing it, put the question whether the man was a Galilean, 7 and, ascertaining that he was from Herod’s jurisdiction, sent him up to Herod, he too being in Jerusalem during those days.
8 And Herod was exceedingly glad to see Jesus; for he had for a considerable time been wanting to see him because he heard him talked of, and he hoped to see some token done by him; 9 and he questioned him at considerable length, but he gave him no answer.
10 And the chief priests and the scribes stood there accusing him energetically.
11 And Herod, with his soldiery, scorned him and made fun of him, and put splendid vestures on him and sent him back to Pilate; 12 and that very day Herod and Pilate became friends, for they had previously been at enmity.
13 But Pilate, calling together the chief priests and the rulers and the people, 14 said to them "You brought this man to me as an alienator of the people, and here have I examined this man before you and not found in him anything punishable under the accusations you bring against him; 15 neither did Herod, for he sent him back to us.
And here he has committed no act to deserve death; 16 so I will give him a lesson and release him. " 17 18 But they screamed out, the whole mass of them, "Get that fellow out of the way and release Bar-Abbas for us " 19 which Bar-Abbas had been thrown into prison for a certain riot that had taken place in the city, and for murder.
20 And Pilate called out to them again, wanting to release Jesus; 21 but they raised a hue and cry "Crucify, crucify him. " 22 And he said to them a third time "Why, what harm has this man done?
I have not found in him anything punishable with death; so I will give him a lesson and release him. " 23 But they pressed their demand with loud cries, asking that he be crucified, and their cries prevailed, 24 and Pilate passed sentence that what they asked should be done; 25 and he released the man thrown into prison for riot and murder, whom they asked for, but gave Jesus up to their will.
26 And as they were leading him to execution they took one Simon, a Cyrenian, who was coming from the country, and put the cross on him to carry it behind Jesus.
27 And there followed him a great number of the people, and of women who bewailed and lamented him; 28 but Jesus turned toward them and said "Daughters of Jerusalem, do not weep for me, but do weep for yourselves and your children; 29 for here are days coming in which they will say ‘Happy are the barren, and the bodies that have not held children, and the breasts that have not fed.’ 30 Then they will begin to say to the mountains ‘Fall on us’ and to the hills ‘Cover us’; 31 because if they do this with a green stick, what will be done with the dry one? " 32 And two other criminals also were led with him to be put to death.
33 And when they came to the place known as the Skull, there they crucified him, and the criminals, one on the right and one on the left.
34 [But Jesus said "Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they are doing. "]
And to divide up his clothes they threw lots; 35 and the people stood looking on.
And the rulers too sneered at him, saying "He saved others; let him save himself, if this is God’s chosen Messiah. " 36 And the soldiers too made fun of him, putting vinegar up to him 37 and saying "If you are the king of the Jews, save yourself. " 38 And there was an inscription over him too, "This is the king of the Jews. " 39 And one of the criminals that were hanging there taunted him: "You are the Messiah, aren’t you? save yourself and us "; 40 but the other answered him in rebuke, "Do you not even fear God, when you are under the same sentence? 41 and we justly, for we are being paid as our acts deserved, but this man had done nothing out of the way, " 42 and said, "Jesus, remember me when you come to your Reign "; 43 and he said to him "I tell you verily, today you shall be with me in Paradise. "
44 And it was now about twelve o’clock, and there came a darkness all over the land till three, 45 the sun going dark; and the curtain of the temple split down the middle, 46 and Jesus, with a loud cry, said "Father, to your hands I commit my spirit "; and with this he expired.
47 And the centurion, seeing what had happened, glorified God, saying "This man really was a saint "; 48 and all the crowds that had thronged to that sight returned beating their breasts after they saw what happened.
49 And all his acquaintances were standing at a distance, and so were women who had come along with him from Galilee, seeing these things.
50 And now a man by name Joseph, who was a member of the Council, a good honest man 51 (he had not assented to their plan and their action) from Arimathea, a city of the Jews, one who was watching for the Reign of God, 52 this man went to Pilate and asked for Jesus’s body, 53 and took it down and wrapped it in a linen wrapper and laid it in a rock-cut tomb where as yet no one was lying.
54 And it was Friday, and the eve of the sabbath had begun; 55 but the women who had come from Galilee with him followed after and viewed the tomb, and how his body was laid, 56 and returned and got ready spices and perfumes.
And through the sabbath they rested according to the commandment.
24:1-53
24 But on the first of the week at early dawn they came to the tomb bringing the spices they had got ready.
2 And they found the stone rolled away from the tomb; 3 but when they went in they did not find the body.
4 And while they were in perplexity over this, lo, there before them stood two men in vestures flashing with light; 5 and, when they were terror-struck and stood bending their faces to the ground, these said to them "Why are you looking for the living among the dead? 6 Remember how he told you, while he was still in Galilee, 7 that the Son of Man must be given over into the hands of sinful men and crucified, and rise on the third day. " 8 And they remembered his words, 9 and returned and reported all this to the Eleven and all the rest.
10 There were the Magdalene Mary and Johanna, and James’s Mary, and the rest with them; they told the apostles this, 11 and the statements appeared to them like nonsense, and they disbelieved the women.
12
13 And lo, that very day two of them were on their way to a village seven miles out from Jerusalem, named Emmaus, 14 conversing together about all these things that had befallen; 15 and while they were conversing and discussing, Jesus himself drew near and went along with them 16 (but their eyes were held from recognizing him) 17 and said to them "What talk is this that you are carrying on with each other as you walk? " and they stood still with dejected faces.
18 And one, Cleopas by name, answered him "Are you the one man who is visiting Jerusalem and has not learned of the things that have been going on in it these days? " 19 And he said to them "What things? "
And they said to him "About Jesus the Nazarene, who showed himself a prophet powerful in deed and word before God and all the people, 20 and how the chief priests and our rulers gave him over to a sentence of death and crucified him; 21 but we were hoping it was he who was to redeem Israel.
Yes, and, besides all this, now is the third day since these things happened.
22 Yes, and some women in our party have been startling us: having been to the tomb at daybreak 23 and not found his body, they came telling us they had also seen a manifestation of angels, who said he was alive; 24 and some of those who were with us went to the tomb and found things the same as the women said, but him they did not see. " 25 And he said to them "O you stupid men, with hearts slow to believe on everything that the prophets spoke! 26 did not the Messiah have to suffer these things and enter on his glory? " 27 and, beginning with Moses and all the prophets, he interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things about himself.
28 And they drew near the village where they were going, and he pretended to be going further; 29 and they pressed him insistently with the invitation "Stay with us, because it is toward evening and the day is already getting low, " and he went in to stay with them.
30 And when he went to the table with them he took the bread, and spoke the blessing and broke it and handed it to them.
31 And their eyes were opened and they recognized him; and he became invisible to them.
32 And they said to each other "Were not our hearts burning in us as he talked to us on the road, as he opened the scriptures to us? " 33 and that very moment they rose and returned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven and those who were with them collected together, 34 saying "The Lord has really risen, and has appeared to Simon, " 35 and gave an account of their experiences on the road and how he became known to them in the breaking of the bread.
36 And while they were thus speaking he himself stood in their midst.
37 And they, terror-struck and unnerved, thought they were seeing a spirit; 38 and he said to them "Why are you alarmed, and why do questionings come up in your hearts? 39 see my hands and my feet, that it is I myself; feel of me and see, because a spirit does not have flesh and bones as you see I have. " 40 41 And while they were still disbelieving for very joy and wondering at it, he said to them "Have you anything eatable here? " 42 And they handed him part of a broiled fish, 43 and he took it before them and ate it.
44 And he said to them "These are my words that I spoke to you while I was still with you, that everything written in the law of Moses and the prophets and the psalms about me must be fulfilled. " 45 Then he opened their mind to understand the scriptures, 46 and said to them "Thus it is written, that the Messiah suffer and rise from the dead on the third day, 47 and that repentance to the pardoning of sins be preached in his name to all the nations, beginning with Jerusalem.
48 You are witnesses to these things.
49 And lo, I am sending out upon you what my Father promised; but do you keep in the city till you are clothed with power from on high. "
50 And he brought them out nearly to Bethany, and raised his hands and blessed them; 51 and in the act of blessing them he moved away from them.
52 And they returned to Jerusalem in great gladness, 53 and were in the temple-precinct continually, blessing God.
John
1:1-51
1 At the first there was the Word, and the Word was where God was, and the Word was God.
2 He was at the first where God was.
3 Everything was made by his agency, and not a thing that was made was made without his agency.
4 In him there was life, and the life was the light of men; 5 and the light is shining in the darkness, and the darkness has not taken it in.
6 There was a man sent from God whose name was John.
7 This man came for testimony, to testify about the light, that all might believe through him.
8 He was not the light but to testify about the light.
9 There was coming into the world the true light that lights every man.
10 He was in the world, and the world was made by his agency, and the world did not know him; 11 he came to what belonged to him, and those who belonged to him did not receive him.
12 But to as many as accepted him he gave the chance to become children of God, to those who believe in his name, 13 who were born not from blood nor from will of flesh nor from will of man, but from God.
14 And the Word became flesh and abode among us and we saw his glory, glory such as that of an only son from the Father, full of grace and truth.
15 John testifies of him and shouts "This was the one I spoke of when I said ‘He who is coming behind me has got ahead of me,’ because he was before I was, " 16 because out of his fullness all of us have had portions, and grace for grace.
17 For the law was given through Moses, grace and truth came in through Jesus Christ.
18 Nobody ever has seen God; an Only Born God, he who is in the Father’s bosom, he gave the account of him.
19 And this is John’s testimony, when the Jews sent priests and Levites to him from Jerusalem to ask him "Who are you? " 20 and he answered and made no denial.
And he said "I am not the Messiah. " 21 And they asked him "Then what? are you Elijah? " and he said "I am not. "
28 This happened in Bethany beyond the Jordan, where John was baptizing.
29 The next day he saw Jesus coming toward him, and said "There is God’s lamb that takes away the world’s sin.
30 That is the one about whom I said ‘There is coming behind me a man who has got ahead of me,’ because he was before I was.
31 And I did not know him, but it was to have him disclosed to Israel that I came baptizing in water. " 32 And John testified "I have seen the Spirit coming down like a dove out of the sky, and it rested on him.
33 And I did not know him; but he who sent me to baptize in water, he said to me ‘The one on whom you see the Spirit come down and rest on him, he is the one that baptizes in Holy Spirit’; 34 and I have seen and have testified that this is the Son of God. "
35 The next day John was standing there again, and two of his disciples, 36 and he looked at Jesus walking along and said "There is God’s lamb "; 37 and the two disciples heard him speak, and followed Jesus.
38 And Jesus turned and saw them following him and said to them "What do you want? " and they said to him "Rabbi (which translated means Teacher), where are you staying? " 39 He said to them "Come and you shall see. "
So they came and saw where he was staying, and stayed with him that day; it was about four o’clock.
40 Simon Peter’s brother Andrew was one of the two that heard from John and followed him; 41 he found his own brother Simon first and said to him "We have found the Messiah " (which means Anointed; translated into Greek it is Christ).
42 He brought him to Jesus; Jesus looked at him and said "You are Simon the son of John, you shall be called Cephas " (which means a rock; translated into Greek, the name is Peter).
43 The next day he wanted to go out to Galilee, and found Philip, and said to him "Follow me. " 44 And Philip was from Bethsaida, Andrew and Peter’s city.
45 Philip found Nathanael and said to him "We have found the one that Moses wrote of in the Law, and that the prophets wrote of, Jesus the son of Joseph from Nazareth "; 46 and Nathanael said to him "Can there be anything good out of Nazareth? "
Philip said to him "Come and see. " 47 Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him and said of him "Here comes a genuine Israelite with no adulteration. " 48 Nathanael said to him "What have you known about me? "
Jesus replied "Before Philip called you I saw you when you were under the fig-tree. " 49 Nathanael answered "Rabbi, you are the son of God, you are the king of Israel. " 50 Jesus replied "Because I said to you I saw you under the fig-tree do you believe? you shall see greater things than these, " 51 and said to him "Verily, verily I tell you, you and the rest shall see the heavens standing open and God’s angels going up and coming down to the Son of Man. "
2:1-25
2 And the next day but one there was a wedding at Cana in Galilee, and Jesus’s mother was there; 2 and Jesus too, and his disciples, were invited to the wedding.
3 And when they ran short of wine Jesus’s mother said to him "They have no wine "; 4 and Jesus said to her "What have you to do with my affairs, woman? the hour for me is not come yet. "
5 His mother said to the waiters "Whatever he says to you, do it. " 6 And there were six stone water-jars there, holding twenty or thirty gallons each, set out in accordance with the Jews’ rites of cleansing.
7 Jesus said to them "Fill the jars with water "; and they filled them clear up; 8 and he said to them "Now dip some out and take it to the toastmaster. "
And they took it to him.
9 And when the toastmaster tasted the water, which had become wine, and did not know where it came from (but the waiters who had dipped the water out knew), the toastmaster called out to the bridegroom 10 "Everybody puts on the good wine first and the poorer when they get under the influence; you have kept the good wine till now. " 11 This, the first of the tokens, Jesus did at Cana in Galilee, and disclosed his glory, and his disciples believed in him.
12 After that he came down to Capernaum, he and his mother and his brothers and his disciples, and they stayed there not many days.
13 And the Jews’ passover was near, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
14 And he found in the temple-precinct the sellers of cattle and sheep and pigeons and the money-changers in their seats, 15 and he made a whip out of bits of rope and drove them all out of the temple-precinct, and the sheep and the cattle, and spilled the money-changers’ coins and upset their tables, 16 and said to the pigeon-sellers "Get these away from here; do not make my Father’s house a market. " 17 His disciples remembered that it is written "Jealousy for thy house will eat me up. "
18 So the Jews replied "What token do you show us, that you are doing this? " 19 Jesus replied "Wreck this temple and I will set it up in three days. " 20 So the Jews said "It took forty-six years to build this temple, and will you set it up in three days? " 21 But he was speaking of the temple of his body; 22 so when he rose from the dead his disciples remembered that he said that, and believed the text of scripture and the word that Jesus had spoken.
23 And while he was in Judea at passover at the feast many believed in his name as they saw the tokens he was doing.
24 But Jesus himself did not trust himself to them, because he knew everybody 25 and did not need to have anybody testify about man, for he himself knew what was in man.
3:1-36
3 Jesus replied "Verily, verily I tell you, if a man is not born over, he cannot see the Reign of God. "
4 Nicodemus said to him "How can a man be born when he is old? can he get into his mother’s body a second time and be born? "
5 Jesus answered "Verily, verily I say to you, if one is not born from water and spirit he cannot get into the Reign of God.
6 What is born from the flesh is flesh and what is born from the spirit is spirit.
7 Do not wonder at my telling you ‘you must be born over.’ 8 The wind blows where it chooses, and you hear the sound of it but do not know where it comes from and where it is going.
Anyone who is born from the spirit is like that. "
9 Nicodemus replied "How can those things be done? "
10 Jesus replied "Are you the teacher of Israel and do you not get the meaning of that? 11 Verily, verily, I tell you that we are speaking of what we know and testifying to what we have seen, and you are not receiving our testimony.
12 If I tell you the earthly side and you do not believe, how will you believe if I tell you the heavenly side? 13 And nobody has gone up to heaven but he who came down out of heaven, the Son of Man.
14 And as Moses raised the snake aloft in the desert, so the Son of Man must be raised aloft, 15 that everyone who believes in him may have eternal life.
16 For God so loved the world that he gave his only son that everyone who believes in him might not perish but have eternal life.
17 For God did not send the Son into the world to judge the world but in order to have the world saved through him.
18 He who believes in him is not judged; he who does not believe is already judged because he has not believed in the name of God’s only son.
19 And this is the judgment, that the light has come into the world and men loved the darkness rather than the light; for their doings were bad.
20 For anyone who is misbehaving hates the light and does not come to the light, that his doings may not be exposed; 21 but he who is doing as truth would have him comes to the light that his doings may be disclosed, because they are work done in God. "
22 After this Jesus and his disciples came into Judea, and he spent a while with them there and baptized.
23 And John too was baptizing at Enon near Salim, because there was much water there; and they came and had themselves baptized, 24 for John had not yet been thrown into prison.
25 So there came up an argument on the part of John’s disciples with a Jew about cleansing; 26 and they came to John and said to him "Rabbi, the one that was with you on the other side of the Jordan, the one you testified for there he is baptizing and everybody is coming to him. "
27 John replied "A man cannot take anything if it is not given to him from heaven. 28 You yourselves bear me witness that I said I was not the Messiah, but that I had been sent before him.
29 The one who has the bride is bridegroom; but the bridegroom’s friend who stands and hears him is right joyous over the bridegroom’s voice; so this joy is mine in full measure.
30 He must grow, but I must dwindle.
31 He who comes from above is above all: he who is from the earth is a thing of earth and speaks things of earth; he who comes from heaven is above all.
32 What he has seen and heard, to that he testifies, and nobody accepts his testimony.
33 He who has accepted his testimony has set his seal to it that God is true; 34 for he whom God has sent speaks God’s words, for he does not give the Spirit by measure.
35 The Father loves the Son, and has given everything into his hand.
36 He who believes in the Son has eternal life; but he who disobeys the Son will not see life, but God’s anger rests on him. "
4:1-54
4 So when the Lord found that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus was making and baptizing more disciples than John 2 yet Jesus did not himself baptize, but his disciples 3 he left Judea and went back to Galilee.
4 And he had to go through Samaria.
5 So he came to a city in Samaria called Sychar, near the piece of land Jacob gave to his son Joseph.
6 And there was a well there, Jacob’s well.
So Jesus, being spent with travel, was sitting by the well in that condition; it was about twelve o’clock; 7 a woman of Samaria came to draw water.
Jesus said to her "Let me have a drink "; 8 for his disciples had gone off to the city to buy food. 9 So the Samaritan woman said to him "How come you, a Jew, to ask me, a Samaritan woman, for a drink? " for the Jews do not associate with the Samaritans.
10 Jesus replied "If you knew the gift of God, and who it is that is saying to you ‘Let me have a drink,’ you would have asked him and he would have given you living water. "
11 She said to him "Sir, you have nothing to draw with and the well is deep; so where do you get the living water? 12 Do you amount to more than our father Jacob, who gave us the well, and drank from it himself, and his sons and his stock? "
13 Jesus replied "Anyone who drinks this water will be thirsty again; 14 but whoever drinks the water that I will give him shall have no thirst forevermore, but the water that I will give him shall become in him a fountain of gushing water to eternal life. "
16 He said to her "Go call your husband and come here. " 17 The woman replied "I have no husband. "
Jesus said to her "You are right in saying ‘I have no husband,’ 18 for you have had five husbands and the one you have now is no husband of yours; you have told the truth in that. "
19 The woman said to him "Sir, I see you are a prophet.
20 Our fathers worshiped on this mountain, and you say the place to worship in is at Jerusalem. "
21 Jesus said to her "Believe me, woman, there is a moment coming when you will not be worshiping the Father either on this mountain or at Jerusalem.
22 You worship what you do not know; we worship what we know, because salvation is of the Jews; 23 but there is a moment coming, and it is here now, when the true worshipers will worship the Father in spirit and truth for the Father aims to have his worshipers such.
24 God is a spirit, and those who worship must worship in spirit and truth. " 25 The woman said to him "I know there is a Messiah coming " (the one who in Greek is called Christ); "when he comes he will tell us the whole story. "
26 Jesus said to her "It is I, I who am speaking to you. "
27 And upon that his disciples came, and wondered that he was talking with a woman; however, nobody said "What are you after? " or "Why are you talking with her? "
28 So the woman left her jar and went off to the city and said to the men 29 "Come see a man that told me everything I had done; do you suppose that is the Messiah? "
30 They came out of the city and were coming to him. 31 In the meantime the disciples asked him "Rabbi, eat something. "
32 But he said to them "I have a meal to eat that you do not know of. " 33 So the disciples said to each other "Did someone bring him something to eat? " 34 Jesus said to them "It is my food that I should do the will of the one who sent me and carry his work through.
35 You say, do you not, ‘Another four months and harvest comes’? here I am telling you, raise your eyes and look at the fields to see that they are white for harvest already.
36 The reaper gets pay and gathers fruit for eternal life, that together the sower and the reaper may be glad, 37 for in this matter the saying holds good that the sower is one man and the reaper another.
38 I sent you to reap what you have not labored on; others have labored and you have come into their labor. "
39 And out of that city many of the Samaritans believed in him because of the woman’s words as she testified "He told me everything I had done. " 40 So when the Samaritans came to him they asked him to stay with them, and he stayed there two days, 41 and many more believed because of his words 42 and said to the woman "We are no longer believing because of your talk, for we have heard for ourselves and know that this positively is the Savior of the World. "
43 But after the two days he went out from there to Galilee; 44 for Jesus himself attested that a prophet does not have honor in his hometown.
45 So when he came to Galilee the Galileans received him, having seen all the things he did at Jerusalem at the feast; for they too had been to the feast.
46 So he came again to Cana in Galilee, where he made the water wine.
And there was a certain royal official whose son was sick at Capernaum; 47 this man heard that Jesus had come from Jerusalem to Galilee, and went to him and asked that he would come down and heal his son, for he was going to die.
48 So Jesus said to him "Unless you see tokens and wonders you will not believe "; 49 the official said to him "Sir, come down before my child dies. " 50 Jesus said to him "Go along, your son recovers "; the man believed the word Jesus gave him and went.
51 And when he was already coming down his servants met him saying his child was recovering.
52 So he inquired from them the hour at which he showed improvement; so they told him "The fever left him at one in the afternoon yesterday. " 53 So the father knew it was at that hour at which Jesus said to him "your son recovers, " and believed, he and his whole family.
54 This second token Jesus did again when he had come out of Judea to Galilee.
5:1-47
5 After this there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
2 And at Jerusalem there is at the Sheep Gate a pool, the one spoken of in Hebrew as Bethzatha, with five porches; 3 in these were lying a multitude of the sick, blind, lame, atrophied.
4 5 And there was a certain man there who had had thirty-eight years of his disease; 6 seeing him lying there, and finding that he had had a long time of it, Jesus said to him "Do you want to get well? "
7 The sick man answered him "Sir, I do not have a man to throw me into the pool when the water is disturbed, and while I am coming somebody else gets down ahead of me. "
8 Jesus said to him "Rise, take up your pallet, and walk. " 9 And at once the man became well and took up his pallet and walked.
And it was sabbath that day; 10 so the Jews said to the cured man "It is sabbath, and it is not lawful for you to carry your pallet. " 11 But he answered "The one that made me well, he said to me ‘Take up your pallet and walk.’ " 12 They asked him "Who was the man that said to you ‘Take it up and walk’? " 13 But the cured man did not know who it was; for Jesus had slipped away, there being a crowd in the place.
14 After this Jesus found him in the temple-precinct and said to him "There, you have got well; do not sin anymore, so that you will not have something worse. " 15 The man went off and told the Jews it was Jesus that had made him well; 16 and because of that the Jews persecuted Jesus, since he had done that on a sabbath.
17 But he answered them "My Father is working till now, and I am working. " 18 So because of that the Jews tried the more to kill him since he was not only overriding the obligation of the sabbath but also calling God his father, claiming to be equal to God.
19 So Jesus replied "Verily, verily I tell you, the Son cannot do anything from himself unless he sees the Father do a thing; for what he does, that the Son likewise does.
20 For the Father loves the Son and shows him everything that he himself is doing, and will show him greater works than these for you to wonder at.
21 For as the Father raises the dead and gives life, so the Son too gives life to whom he will.
22 For the Father does not judge anyone either, but he has given all jurisdiction to the Son, 23 that all may honor the Son as they honor the Father.
He who does not honor the Son does not honor the Father who sent him.
24 Verily, verily I tell you that he who hears my words and believes him who sent me has eternal life, and does not come under judgment but has passed from death to life.
25 Verily, verily I tell you that there is a moment coming, and it is here now, when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God, and those who hear will come to life, 26 for as the Father has life in himself so he has given it to the Son to have life in himself; 27 and he has given him authority to administer judgment because he is Son of Man.
28 Do not wonder at this, because there is a moment coming at which all in the tombs will hear his voice 29 and pass out, those who have done what was good to resurrection of life, those who have misbehaved to resurrection of judgment.
30 I cannot do anything from myself: I pronounce judgment as I hear, and my judgment is just because I am not looking out for my will but for the will of the one that sent me.
31 "If I testify about myself, my testimony is not true; 32 there is another who testifies about me, and I know the testimony he gives about me is true.
33 You have sent to John and he has testified to the truth; 34 but I do not draw on a man for testimony, but am saying these things that you may be saved.
35 He was the lamp that burned and shone; and you were willing to jubilate in his light for a moment.
36 But I have greater testimony than John’s; for the works that the Father has given it to me to carry through, the very works that I am doing, testify about me that the Father has sent me.
37 And the Father who sent me, he has testified about me.
You have never yet heard his voice nor seen his form, 38 and you do not have his word resting in you, because you do not believe him whom he sent.
39 You search through the scriptures because you think that in them you have eternal life, and they are what testify about me, 40 and you are not willing to come to me to have life.
41 I do not accept glory from men; 42 but I know you as not having the love of God in you.
43 I have come in my Father’s name and you do not accept me; if another comes in his own name you will accept him.
44 How can you believe when you accept glory from each other and do not look out for the glory that comes from the only God? 45 Do not think I will accuse you to the Father; there is one who does accuse you, Moses, to whom you have pinned your hopes; 46 for if you believed Moses you would be believing me, for he wrote about me.
47 But if you do not believe his writings how will you believe my sayings? "
6:1-71
6 After this Jesus went off to the other side of the Sea of Galilee (of Tiberias).
2 And a great crowd followed him, because they saw the tokens he was doing on the sick.
3 And Jesus went up on the mountainside and sat there with his disciples.
4 And the passover, the Jews’ feast, was near.
5 So Jesus, raising his eyes and seeing the sight of a great crowd coming to him, said to Philip "Where shall we buy bread for these to eat? " 6 But he was saying this to test him; for he himself knew what he was going to do.
7 Philip answered him "Two hundred denarii worth of bread is not enough for them each to take a little bit. " 8 One of his disciples, Simon Peter’s brother Andrew, said to him 9 "There is a child here who has five barley cakes and two fish for relish; but what is that for so many? "
10 Jesus said "Have the men take their seats. "
And there was much grass in the place; so the men took their seats, in number about five thousand.
11 So Jesus took the cakes and gave thanks and distributed to the men on the grass, similarly of the fish too, as much as they wanted.
12 And when they were filled he said to his disciples "Pick up the fragments that were left over so that there shall not be anything lost. " 13 So they did it, and filled twelve baskets with fragments that the eaters had had left over from the five barley cakes.
14 So the men, seeing the token he did, said "This positively is the prophet that was to come into the world. " 15 So Jesus, finding that they were going to come and seize him to make a king of him, withdrew to the mountainside again alone by himself.
16 And when it came evening his disciples went down to the sea 17 and got into a boat and were coming to Capernaum on the other side of the sea; and darkness had already come down and Jesus had not yet come to them, 18 and the sea was being stirred up as a high wind blew.
19 So they had rowed about three or four miles when they saw Jesus walking on the sea and getting near the boat, and they were afraid.
20 But he said to them "It is I, do not be afraid "; 21 so they were willing to take him into the boat, and at once the boat was at the land they were bound for.
22 The next day the crowd that was standing on the other side of the sea saw that there had been no other boat there but one, and that Jesus had not got into the boat with his disciples but the disciples had gone off alone.
23 But boats from Tiberias came near the place where they had eaten the bread after the Lord gave thanks; 24 so when the crowd saw that Jesus was not there, nor his disciples, they themselves went on board the boats and came to Capernaum looking for Jesus; 25 and, finding him on the other side of the sea, they said to him "Rabbi, when did you get here? " 26 Jesus replied to them "Verily, verily I tell you, you are looking for me not because you saw tokens but because you ate out of the bread and satisfied your appetites.
27 Work not for perishable food but for the food that lasts into eternal life, which the Son of Man will give you, for him the Father, God, sealed. "
28 So they said to him "What shall we do to do God’s work? " 29 Jesus replied to them "This is God’s work, for you to believe in the one he sent. " 30 So they said to him "Then what token do you do so that we may see and believe you? what do you do? 31 Our fathers ate the manna in the desert, as it says ‘He gave them bread from heaven to eat.’ " 32 So Jesus said to them "Verily, verily I tell you, not Moses has given you the bread from heaven, but my Father is giving you the true bread from heaven; 33 for God’s bread is the bread that comes down from heaven and gives the world life. " 34 So they said to him "Sir, give us this bread always. "
35 Jesus said to them "I am the bread of life; he who comes to me shall not go hungry, and he who believes in me shall not go thirsty, ever; 36 but I told you you have even seen and do not believe.
37 Whatever the Father gives me will come to me; and I will not turn out the one who comes to me, 38 because I have come down from heaven not to do my will but the will of the one who sent me.
39 And this is the will of the one who sent me, that of whatever he has given me I should not lose any but should raise it on the Last Day.
40 For this is my Father’s will, that whoever sees the Son and believes in him should have eternal life and I should raise him on the Last Day. "
41 So the Jews complained of him because he said "I am the bread that came down from heaven, " 42 and said "Why, this is Jesus the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know; how is he saying now ‘I have come down from heaven’? "
43 Jesus replied to them "Do not complain to each other.
44 Nobody can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him and I shall raise him on the Last Day.
45 It says in the prophets ‘and they shall all be taught of God’; everyone who has heard from the Father and has learned comes to me; 46 not that anyone has seen the Father, except he who is from God, he has seen the Father.
47 "Verily, verily I tell you, he who believes has eternal life.
48 I am the bread of life.
49 Your fathers ate the manna in the desert and died; 50 this is the bread that comes down from heaven for a man to eat of and not die.
51 I am the living bread that came down from heaven; if one eats of this bread he will live forever; yes, and the bread that I will give is my flesh, for the life of the world. "
52 So the Jews wrangled with each other, saying "How can this man give us his flesh to eat? " 53 So Jesus said to them "Verily, verily I tell you, if you do not eat the Son of Man’s flesh and drink his blood you do not have life in you.
54 He who does feast on my flesh and drink my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him on the Last Day; 55 for my flesh is true food and my blood is true drink.
56 He who feasts on my flesh and drinks my blood remains in me, and I in him.
57 As the living Father sent me and I live because of the Father, he also who feasts on me will live too because of me.
58 This is the bread that came down from heaven, not as the fathers ate and died; he who feasts on this bread will live forever. "
59 This he said in a synagogue as he was teaching in Capernaum; 60 so many of his disciples, hearing it, said "These words come hard; who can listen to him? " 61 But Jesus, knowing in himself that his disciples were complaining about this, said to them "Does this stagger you? 62 so if you see the Son of Man go up where he was formerly 63 The spirit is what gives life; the flesh is of no use; the words I have spoken to you are spirit and are life.
64 But there are some of you that do not believe. "
For Jesus knew from the first who it was that did not believe and who it was that was to be the agent in his arrest.
65 And he said "That is why I have been saying to you that nobody can come to me unless it is given to him from the Father. "
66 At this many of his disciples backed off and no longer went about with him.
67 So Jesus said to the Twelve "Do you too mean to go? " 68 Simon Peter answered him "Sir, to whom shall we go? you have words of eternal life, 69 and for our part we do believe and know that you are God’s Holy One. " 70 Jesus answered them "Did I not choose you twelve? and one of you is a backbiter. " 71 He meant Judas the son of Simon an Iscariot; for he, one of the Twelve, was going to be the agent in his arrest.
7:1-53
7 And after this Jesus went about in Galilee; for he would not go about in Judea because the Jews were trying to kill him.
2 And the Jews’ Feast of Booths was near; 3 so his brothers said to him "Get away from here and go to Judea so that your disciples too will see your deeds that you do; 4 for nobody does anything in secret and tries to be personally a public figure.
If you are doing these things, make yourself visible to the world. " 5 For even his brothers did not believe in him.
6 So Jesus said to them "My time is not come yet, but your time is always ready.
7 The world cannot hate you; but me it does hate, because I testify about it that its doings are bad.
8 Go up to the feast yourselves; I am not going up to this feast yet, because my time is not fully come. " 9 And, saying this to them, he stayed in Galilee.
10 But when his brothers had gone up to the feast, he too went up, not openly but as it were in secret.
11 So the Jews looked for him at the feast and said "Where is he? " 12 and there was a great deal of complaining about him in the crowds some said "He is good, " others said "No, he misleads the crowd. " 13 However, nobody spoke publicly of him for fear of the Jews.
14 But when the feast was already at its middle Jesus went up to the temple-precinct and taught.
15 So the Jews wondered, saying "How is it this man knows books without having learned? "
16 So Jesus replied to them "My teaching is not mine, but his who sent me; 17 if one wants to do his will he will know about the teaching, whether it is from God or I am speaking from myself.
18 He who speaks from himself aims at his own glory; but he who aims at the glory of the one who sent him, he is true and there is no wrong in him.
19 Did not Moses give you the law? and no one of you lives up to the law.
Why are you trying to kill me? "
20 The crowd answered "You are possessed; who is trying to kill you? "
21 Jesus replied to them "I did one deed and you are all wondering because of that.
22 Moses has given you circumcision (not that it is from Moses, but from the fathers), and on the sabbath you circumcise a man.
23 If a man receives circumcision on the sabbath in order that Moses’s law may not be slighted, are you exasperated with me because I made a whole man well on the sabbath? 24 Do not judge by appearances, but pass the just judgment. "
25 So some of the Jerusalemites said "Why, this is the one they are trying to kill; 26 and here he is speaking publicly and they are saying nothing to him can it be that the rulers have positively found out that this is the Messiah? 27 But we know where this man is from; but when the Messiah comes nobody knows where he is from. " 28 So Jesus, as he was teaching in the temple-precinct, cried out "You both know me and know where I am from; and I have not come of myself, but the one who sent me is genuine whom you do not know; 29 I know him, because I am from him and he sent me. " 30 So they meant to arrest him and nobody laid a hand on him, because his hour had not come yet.
31 And of the crowd many believed in him and said "Will the Messiah, when he comes, do more tokens than this man has? "
32 The Pharisees heard the crowd voicing these thoughts about him, and the chief priests and the Pharisees sent officers to arrest him.
33 So Jesus said "I am to be with you a little while longer and go to the one that sent me; 34 you will look for me and not find me, and where I am you cannot come. " 35 So the Jews said to each other "Where is the man going, that we shall not find him? is he going to the colonies among the Greeks to teach the Greeks? 36 What is the idea of that that he said, ‘You will look for me and not find me, and where I am you cannot come’? "
37 And on the last day, the great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried out "If anybody is thirsty, come to me and drink.
38 He who believes in me will, as the text said, have rivers of living water flowing out of his body. " 39 And this he said with reference to the Spirit which those who believed in him were to receive; for there was not yet any Spirit, because Jesus was not glorified yet.
50 Nicodemus, he who had come to him before, said to them, being one of them, 51 "Does your law pass judgment on a man without having first heard him and found out what he is doing? " 52 They replied to him "Are you too from Galilee?
Look up and see that there does not arise a prophet from Galilee. " John 7:53 and John 8:1-11 are printed at the end of John.
STORY OF A WOMAN CAUGHT IN ADULTERY Not a part of any of the four gospels, but regarded as genuine gospel history.
The verses are numbered as part of the seventh and eighth chapters of John.
53 And they went their ways, each to his home.
8:1-59
8 And Jesus went to the Mount of Olives.
5 And in the law Moses commanded us to stone such; so what do you say? " 6 But Jesus bent over and wrote something down on the ground with his finger. 7 But when they kept pressing the question on him he straightened up and said to them "For the first let the sinless one of you throw a stone at her " 8 and bent down again and wrote on the ground. 9 And they, hearing that, went out one by one, beginning with the oldest, and he was left alone, and the woman, who was in the middle.
And Jesus said "Neither do I; go; no more sinning from now on. "
14 Jesus replied to them "Even if I am giving testimony about myself, my testimony is true, because I know where I came from and where I am going; but you do not know where I come from or where I am going. 15 You judge from the standpoint of the flesh.
I do not judge anybody; 16 and if I do judge my judgment is true, because I am not alone but I and the one who sent me; 17 and it is written in your law too that two men’s testimony is true.
18 It is I that testify about myself, and the Father who sent me testifies about me. "
19 So they said to him "Where is your Father? "
Jesus answered "You do not know either me or my Father; if you knew me you would know my Father too. " 20 These words he spoke in the treasury, teaching in the temple-precinct, and nobody arrested him because his hour had not come yet.
21 So he said to them again "I am going, and you will look for me and will die in your sins; where I am going you cannot come. "
22 So the Jews said "Will he kill himself, that he says ‘Where I am going you cannot come’? " 23 And he said to them "You belong to those below, I belong to those above; you are out of this world, I am not out of this world; 24 so I told you you would die in your sins, for if you do not believe I am the one, die in your sins you will. "
25 So they said to him "Who are you? " Jesus said to them ". . . in the first place that I am even speaking to you.
26 I have much speaking and judging about you to do; but the one who sent me is truthful, and I speak into the world what I heard from him. "
27 They did not see that he meant the Father.
28 So Jesus said "When you raise the Son of Man aloft, then you will find out that I am the one and am doing nothing of myself, but as the Father instructed me, so I speak.
29 And the one who sent me is with me; he does not leave me alone, because I always do what is pleasing to him. " 30 As he spoke these words many believed in him.
31 So Jesus said to the Jews that had believed him "If you remain in my words you are really disciples of mine 32 and shall know the truth, and the truth will set you free. " 33 They answered back "We are Abraham’s descendants and have never yet been slaves to anybody; how is it you say ‘you will be set free’? "
34 Jesus answered "Verily, verily I tell you that everyone who commits sin is a slave of sin.
35 And the slave does not stay in the house forever; the son does.
36 So if the Son sets you free you will be really free.
37 I know you are Abraham’s descendants; but you are trying to kill me because my words do not find room in you.
38 I speak what I have seen in Father’s home; so do on your part what you heard from Father. "
39 They replied "Abraham is our father. "
Jesus said to them "If you are Abraham’s children, do Abraham’s deeds.
40 But now you are trying to kill me, a man that have spoken the truth to you, which I heard from God; Abraham did not do that.
41 You are doing your father’s deeds. "
They said to him "We were not born illegitimately; we have one father, God. "
42 Jesus said to them "If God were your father you would love me, for I went out from God and come from him; for I have not come of myself either, but he sent me.
43 Why do you not get the meaning of my talk? because you cannot hear my words.
44 You come of your father the Devil, and it is your father’s desires that you want to act out.
He was a man-killer from the first, and did not keep his stand in the truth because there is no truth in him.
When he speaks falsehood he speaks a thing of his own, because he is a liar and father of it.
45 And because I tell the truth you do not believe me.
46 Which of you convicts me of a sin?
If I tell truth, why do you not believe me? 47 He who is from God hears God’s words; consequently it is because you are not from God that you do not hear. "
48 The Jews replied "Are we not right in saying you are a Samaritan and have a demon? "
49 Jesus answered "I do not have a demon; but I am honoring my Father and you are dishonoring me.
50 But I am not looking out for my glory; there is one who looks out and judges.
51 Verily, verily I tell you, if one keeps my words he shall not behold death forevermore. " 52 The Jews said to him "Now we know you have a demon.
Abraham died, and the prophets, and you say ‘if one keeps my words he shall not taste death forevermore.’ 53 Are you greater than our father Abraham, who died? and the prophets died; whom are you claiming to be? "
54 Jesus answered "If I glorify myself there is nothing to my glory.
It is my Father that glorifies me, who you say is your God, 55 and you do not know him.
But I do know him; and if I say I do not know him I shall be a liar like you; but I know him and keep his words.
56 Your father Abraham exulted that he should see my day, and he saw it and was glad. "
57 So the Jews said to him "You are not yet fifty years old, and has Abraham seen you? " 58 Jesus said to them "Verily, verily I tell you, before there was an Abraham I am. " 59 So they picked up stones to throw at him. But Jesus was hidden, and went out of the temple-precinct.
9:1-41
9 And as he passed along he saw a man blind from birth.
2 And his disciples asked him "Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he should be born blind? " 3 Jesus answered "Neither this man nor his parents sinned, but it was in order that God’s doings might be disclosed in him.
4 We must do the work of the one who sent me while it is day; there is coming a night when nobody can work.
5 When I am in the world I am the light of the world. " 6 Saying this, he spat on the ground and made mud out of the spit, and put the mud on his eyes, 7 and said to him "Go wash your face in the pool of Siloam " (the translation of which is "Sent ").
So he went and washed his face, and came back able to see.
8 So the neighbors and those who had formerly seen him to be a beggar said "Is not this the one that was sitting and begging? " 9 Some said "This is the one "; others said "No, but he is like him. "
He said "I am the one. "
10 So they said to him "Then how were your eyes opened? " 11 He answered "The man known as Jesus made mud and rubbed it on my eyes and told me ‘go to Siloam and wash your face’; so I went and washed my face and had my eyesight back. " 12 And they said to him "Where is he? "
He said "I do not know. "
13 So they brought him (the once blind man) to the Pharisees.
14 And the day on which Jesus made the mud and opened his eyes was sabbath.
15 So the Pharisees too asked him again how he recovered his sight.
And he said to them "He put mud on my eyes, and I washed my face, and can see. " 16 So some of the Pharisees said "This man is not from God, because he does not keep the sabbath "; others said "How can a sinful man do such tokens? " and there was a split among them.
17 So they said to the blind man again "What do you say about him because he opened your eyes? "
And he said "That he is a prophet. "
18 So the Jews did not believe about him that he had been blind and had recovered his sight until they had called his parents, the cured man’s, 19 and asked them "This is your son, who you say was born blind; then how is it he can see now? " 20 So his parents replied "We know that this is our son and that he was born blind; 21 but how it is he can see now we do not know, or who opened his eyes; we do not know, ask him; he is of age, he will speak for himself. " 22 This his parents said because they were afraid of the Jews; for the Jews had already agreed that if anybody acknowledged him as Messiah he should be excommunicated.
23 This was why his parents said "he is of age, he will speak for himself. "
24 So they called in for the second time the man who had been blind, and said to him "Give glory to God; we know that this man is sinful. " 25 So he answered "Whether he is sinful I do not know; one thing I do know, that I was blind and now can see. "
26 So they said to him "What did he do to you? how did he open your eyes? " 27 He answered "I told you already and you did not hear; what do you want to hear again for? do you too want to become disciples of him? " 28 And they abused him and said "You are a disciple of him, but we are disciples of Moses.
29 We know God has spoken to Moses, but as for this man we do not know where he comes from. "
30 The man replied "Now that is just what is remarkable, that you do not know where he comes from and he opened my eyes.
31 We know that God does not listen to sinners, but if one is religious and does his will, him he does listen to.
32 Since the beginning of time it was never heard that anybody had opened the eyes of a person born blind.
33 If this man were not from God he could not do anything. " 34 They replied "You were born all in sins, and are you teaching us? " and turned him out.
35 Jesus heard that they had turned him out, and found him and said to him "You believe on the Son of Man? " 36 He replied "And who is he, sir? so that I may believe in him. " 37 Jesus said to him "You have seen him, yes, and he is the one that is speaking with you. " 38 And he said "I believe, sir, " and did reverence to him.
39 And Jesus said "It was for a judgment I came into this world: that those who cannot see may see and those who can may become blind. " 40 Some of the Pharisees, those who were with him, heard this and said to him "Are we blind too? "
41 Jesus said to them "If you were blind you would not have any sin; but now you say ‘We can see’ your sin stands.
10 "Verily, verily I tell you, he who does not come into the fold of sheep through the door but climbs in elsewhere, that man is a thief and a robber; 2 but he who comes in through the door is shepherd of those sheep.
3 To him the doorkeeper opens, and the sheep hear his voice, and he calls his sheep by name and leads them out.
4 When he gets out all that are his, he goes before them, and the sheep follow him, because they know his voice; 5 but a man they do not belong to they will not follow but will run away from him, because they do not know the voices of men they do not belong to. "
6 This parable Jesus told them; but they did not know what the things he spoke to them meant.
7 So Jesus said again "Verily, verily I tell you that I am the door for the sheep.
8 All that came before me are thieves and robbers; but the sheep did not listen to them.
9 I am the door; anyone who enters through me will be safe and sound and go in and out and find pasturage.
10 The thief comes only to steal and kill and waste; I came that they may have life and plenty of it.
11 I am the good shepherd; the good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep.
12 The hired man, who is not actual shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, sees the wolf coming and leaves the sheep and runs, and the wolf carries them off and scatters them; 13 because he is a hired man and does not care about the sheep.
14 I am the good shepherd, and I know mine and mine know me, 15 as the Father knows me and I know the Father; and I lay down my life for the sheep.
16 And I have other sheep which do not belong to this fold; those too I must bring, and they will hear my voice, and there will come to be one flock, one shepherd.
17 "That is why the Father loves me, because I lay down my life, to take it again.
18 Nobody has deprived me of it, but I lay it down of my own accord.
I am authorized to lay it down and I am authorized to take it again; I was given this commission by my Father. "
19 There came a split among the Jews again because of these words.
20 And many of them said "He has a demon-possession and is out of his head; why do you listen to him? " 21 others said "These words are not a possessed man’s; can a demon-possession open blind men’s eyes? "
22 At that time came the feast of the Dedication at Jerusalem; it was winter; 23 and Jesus was walking in the temple-precinct, in Solomon’s Porch.
24 So the Jews surrounded him and said to him "How long are you keeping us in suspense? if you are the Messiah, tell us frankly. " 25 Jesus answered them "I told you and you do not believe.
The very deeds I am doing in my Father’s name testify about me; 26 but you do not believe because you are not sheep of mine.
27 My sheep listen to my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, 28 and I give them eternal life, and they shall not be lost forevermore, and no one will carry them off out of my hands.
29 My Father who has given to me is greatest of all things, and nobody can carry off out of the Father’s hands.
30 I and the Father are one. "
31 Again the Jews lifted stones to stone him.
32 Jesus answered "I showed you many good works from the Father; for which of them are you stoning me? "
33 The Jews answered "We are not stoning you in reference to a good work, but to a blasphemy and because you, being a man, are claiming to be God. " 34 Jesus answered "Is it not set down in your law ‘I said, You are gods’? 35 If he called those men gods, those who had had God’s word coming to them, and the text cannot be invalidated, 36 do you say of the one whom the Father consecrated and sent into the world ‘You are blaspheming’ because I said ‘I am God’s son’? 37 If I do not do my Father’s deeds, do not believe me; 38 but if I do, even if you do not believe me believe the deeds, that you may find out and know that the Father is in me and I am in the Father. "
39 So they again meant to arrest him; and he came out of their hands, 40 and went off across the Jordan again to the place where John had first been when he was baptizing, and stayed there; 41 and many came to him and said "John did not do any token, but everything John said about this man was true "; 42 and many believed in him there.
11:1-57
11 But there was a certain man who was sick, Lazarus from Bethany, the village of Mary and her sister Martha.
2 And it was the Mary that put perfume on the Lord and wiped his feet off with her hair whose brother Lazarus was sick.
3 So the sisters sent word to him "Sir, the man you are fond of is sick! " 4 And when Jesus heard it he said "This sickness is not for death, but for God’s glory, that the Son of God may be glorified through it. " 5 And Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus.
6 So when he heard that he was sick what he did then was to stay two days in the place where he was; 7 then after that he said to the disciples "Let us go to Judea again. " 8 The disciples said to him "Rabbi, just now the Jews were meaning to kill you, and are you going there again? " 9 Jesus answered "There are twelve hours to a day, are there not?
If one walks in the day he does not stub his toe, because he sees this world’s light; 10 but if one walks in the night he does, because he does not have the light in him. "
11 This he said, and after that he said to them "Our friend Lazarus has gone to rest, but I am on my way to wake him up. " 12 So the disciples said to him "Sir, if he is getting rest he will recover. " 13 But Jesus had been speaking of his death; but they thought he was speaking of the rest of sleep.
14 So then Jesus said to them plainly "Lazarus is dead, 15 and I am glad on your account, so that you may believe, that I was not there; but let us go to him. "
16 So Thomas, known as the Twin, said to his fellow-disciples "Let us go too, to die with him. "
17 So Jesus came and found him in the tomb, where he had been four days already.
18 And Bethany was near Jerusalem, rather more than a mile and a half off.
19 And many of the Jews had come to Mary and Martha’s to condole with them about their brother.
20 So Martha, when she heard that Jesus was coming, went and met him; but Mary was sitting in the house.
21 So Martha said to Jesus "Sir, if you had been here my brother would not have died; 22 and even now I know that whatever you ask God for, God will give to you. "
23 Jesus said to her "Your brother shall rise. " 24 Martha said to him "I know he will rise in the resurrection on the last day. "
25 Jesus said to her "I am Resurrection and Life; he who believes in me shall live even if he dies, 26 and anyone who lives and believes in me shall not die ever.
Do you believe that? " 27 She said to him "Yes, sir: I am believing that you are the Messiah, the son of God, who was to come into the world. " 28 And, saying this, she went away and called her sister Mary privately, saying "The Teacher is here and is calling you. " 29 And she, when she heard, started up and came to him.
30 And Jesus had not yet come into the village, but was still at the place where Martha met him.
31 So the Jews that were in the house with her and were comforting her, seeing that Mary started up and went out, followed her, thinking she was going to the tomb to weep there.
32 So when Mary came where Jesus was, at seeing him she threw herself down at his feet, saying to him "Sir, if you had been here my brother would not have died. " 33 So Jesus, when he saw her weeping and saw the Jews that had come with her weeping, controlled himself with an effort and showed agitation, 34 and said "Where have you laid him? "
They said to him "Sir, come and see. "
35 Jesus wept.
36 So the Jews said "See how he loved him. " 37 But some of them said "Could not this man who opened the blind man’s eyes cause this man not to die too? "
38 So Jesus, again controlling himself, came to the tomb.
And it was a cave, and there was a stone laid over it.
39 Jesus said "Lift off the stone. "
Martha, the sister of the deceased, said to him "Sir, he is smelling by now, for it is four days. " 40 Jesus said to her "Did I not tell you that if you believed you should see God’s glory? " 41 So they lifted the stone off.
And Jesus raised his eyes upward and said "Father, I thank you that you heard me.
42 And I knew you always do hear me; but I said it because of the crowd standing around me, that they may believe that you sent me. " 43 And, having said this, he shouted in a loud voice "Lazarus, come out here! " 44 Out came the man that had died, with his feet and hands tied with strips of cloth and his face tied up in a handkerchief.
Jesus said to them "Untie him and let him go. "
45 So a great many of the Jews, such as had come to Mary’s and witnessed what he did, believed in him; 46 but some of them went off to the Pharisees and told them the things Jesus had done.
47 So the chief priests and the Pharisees got together a Sanhedrin and said "What are we doing that this man is doing so many tokens? 48 if we let him go on like this everybody will believe in him, and the Romans will come and take away both our place and our nation. " 49 But one of them, a certain Caiaphas, being high priest that year, said to them "You folks do not know anything, 50 and you do not reflect that it is best for you to have one man die for the people and not the whole nation perish. " 51 And this he did not say of his own accord, but, being high priest that year, prophetically, that Jesus was to die for the nation, 52 and not only for the nation but to bring together God’s scattered children too into one.
53 So from that day on they planned to kill him.
54 So Jesus no longer went about publicly among the Jews, but went away from there to the country near the desert, to a city called Ephraim, and stayed there with the disciples.
55 But it was near the Jews’ passover, and many from the country went up to Jerusalem before the passover to purify themselves.
56 So they looked for Jesus, and said as they stood together in the temple-precinct "What do you think? that he will not come to the feast? " 57 And the chief priests and the Pharisees had given orders that if anybody found out where he was he should give information, so that they might arrest him.
12:1-50
12 So Jesus came six days before the passover to Bethany, where Lazarus, whom Jesus raised from the dead, was.
2 So they gave a dinner for him there, and Martha waited on them, but Lazarus was one of those who were at the table with him.
3 So Mary took a pound of high-priced perfume, nard in pistachio oil, and rubbed Jesus’s feet and wiped his feet off with her hair; and the house was filled with the odor of the perfume.
4 And Judas the Iscariot, one of his disciples, the one who was going to be the agent in his arrest, 5 said "Why was this perfume not sold for three hundred denarii and given to poor people? " 6 (But he said this not because he cared about the poor, but because he was a thief, and, having the money-box, carried off what was dropped in.) 7 So Jesus said "Let her keep it for the day of my burial; 8 for you always have the poor with you, but you do not always have me. "
9 So the big crowd of the Jews found out that he was there, and they came not only because of Jesus but to see Lazarus too whom he raised from the dead.
10 And the chief priests planned to kill Lazarus too 11 because many of the Jews went because of him and believed in Jesus.
12 The following day the big crowd that had come to the feast, hearing that Jesus was coming into Jerusalem, 13 took the fronds of the palm trees and went out to meet him and shouted "Hosanna! blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord, and the king of Israel! " 14 And Jesus, having found a little donkey, mounted it, as it says 15 "Do not be afraid, daughter of Sion: here is your King coming to you, riding on an ass colt. " 16 These things the disciples did not find out in the first place; but when Jesus was glorified they remembered that it said these things of him and they had done these things to him.
17 So the crowd that had been with him when he called Lazarus out of the tomb and raised him from the dead bore witness.
18 It was because of this, too, that the crowd met him, because they heard that he had done this token.
19 So the Pharisees said to each other "You see you are doing no good: there is the world gone after him. "
20 And there were certain Greeks who were among those who came up to do reverence at the feast; 21 so these approached Philip, the one who came from Bethsaida in Galilee, and asked him "Sir, we wish to see Jesus. " 22 Philip came and told Andrew; Andrew and Philip came and told Jesus.
23 And Jesus answered them "The moment has come for the Son of Man to be glorified.
24 Verily, verily I tell you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies it is still itself alone; but if it dies it bears a great crop.
25 He who loves his life loses it, and he who hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life.
26 If one is serving me let him follow me, and where I am, there my servant too will be.
If one serves me, the Father will honor him.
27 Now my soul is in a turmoil; and what shall I say?
Father, save me from this moment but it was on this account that I came to this moment; 28 Father, glorify your name. "
So there came a voice out of the sky "I did, and will again. " 29 So the crowd that was standing there and heard said it had thundered; others said "An angel has spoken to him. "
30 Jesus replied "This voice did not come on my account but on yours.
31 Now is the judgment of this world; now the ruler of this world will be put out; 32 and I, if I am lifted off the earth, shall draw everybody to myself. " 33 (And this he said indicating what death he was to die.)
34 So the crowd answered him "We heard out of the Law that the Messiah stays forever, and how is it you say that the Son of Man must be lifted off? what Son of Man is this? "
35 So Jesus said to them "For a little while longer the light is among you.
Walk while you have the light, that darkness may not overtake you and he who walks in the darkness does not know where he goes.
36 While you have the light, believe in the light, that you may become sons of light. "
These things Jesus uttered, and went off and hid from them.
37 But after he had done so many tokens before them they did not believe in him, 38 that the prophet Isaiah’s word that he spoke might be fulfilled, "Lord, who believed our news, and to whom was the Lord’s arm revealed? " 39 This was why they could not believe, because Isaiah said again 40 "He has put out their eyes and caked their hearts that they may not see with their eyes and understand with their hearts and turn about, and I heal them. " 41 This Isaiah said because he had seen his glory and spoke of him.
42 Nevertheless, even of the rulers many did believe in him, but because of the Pharisees they did not avow it, that they might not be excommunicated; 43 for they cared more for men’s glory than for God’s.
44 And Jesus shouted "He who believes in me is not believing in me but in the one who sent me, 45 and he who sees me is seeing the one who sent me.
46 I have come into the world as a light, that anyone who believes in me may not remain in the darkness.
47 And if one hears my words and does not keep them, I do not judge him, not I; for I did not come to judge the world but to save the world.
48 He who disregards me and does not take my words has the one who judges him; the word that I spoke, that word will judge him at the last day, 49 because I did not speak out of myself but the Father who sent me has himself given me orders what to say and to speak, 50 and I know that his orders are eternal life; so what I speak I speak just as the Father has told me. "
13:1-38
13 But before the feast of the passover Jesus, knowing that his moment had come for passing from this world to the Father, having loved his own who were in the world, loved them to the last; 2 and, there coming a dinner when the Devil had already put it in the heart of Judas Iscariot the son of Simon to have him arrested, 3 he, knowing that the Father had put everything in his hands and that he had come out from God and was going to God, 4 rose from the dinner and laid off his clothes and took a towel and tied it round him as breech-cloth; 5 then he put water in the pitcher and began to wash the disciples’ feet and to wipe them off with the towel he had on.
6 So he came to Simon Peter. He said to him "Sir, are you washing my feet? "
7 Jesus replied "What I am doing you do not know now, but you will find out later. " 8 Peter said to him "You shall never in the world wash my feet. "
Jesus answered him "If I do not wash you you have nothing in common with me. "
9 Simon Peter said to him "Sir, not only my feet but my hands and head too. "
12 So when he had washed their feet and had resumed his clothes and taken his place at the table again he said to them "Do you know what it is I have done to you? 13 You call me Teacher and Master, and you are right; for I am.
14 So if I the Teacher and Master washed your feet, you too are bound to wash each other’s feet; 15 for I gave you an example to have you too do as I did to you.
16 Verily, verily I tell you, a servant is not greater than his master, nor a representative than his sender.
17 If you know these things, happy are you if you do them.
18 I am not speaking of all of you; I know whom I chose; but it was in order that the text ‘He who was feeding on my bread raised his heel against me’ should be fulfilled.
19 From now on I tell you before the event, that when it takes place you may know that I am the one.
20 Verily, verily I tell you, he who accepts anyone I send is accepting me, and he who is accepting me is accepting the one who sent me. "
21 After saying these things Jesus showed agitation of spirit, and testified and said "Verily, verily I tell you that one of you will have me arrested. " 22 The disciples looked at each other, at a loss to know of whom he was speaking.
23 There was at the table, resting in Jesus’s bosom, one of his disciples whom Jesus loved; 24 so Simon Peter nodded to that one and said to him "Ask who it is he is speaking of. " 25 He, dropping back on Jesus’s breast from the position he was in, said to him "Sir, who is it? " 26 So Jesus answered "It is that one to whom I will give the piece of bread when I dip it in "; so he dipped the piece of bread in and gave it to Judas the son of Simon Iscariot; 27 and after the piece of bread, then Satan came into him.
So Jesus said to him "Be quick about what you are doing. " 28 And none of those at the table knew what was the point of his saying this to him; 29 for some thought, since Judas had the money-box, Jesus was telling him "Buy what we need for the feast " or to give something to the poor.
30 So he, after taking the piece of bread, went out at once.
And it was night.
31 So when he had gone out Jesus said "Now the Son of Man is glorified, and God is glorified in him.
32 If God is glorified in him, God on his part will glorify him in himself and glorify him at once.
33 Children, I shall be with you little longer.
You will look for me, and as I said to the Jews ‘where I am going you cannot come,’ so I say to you now.
34 I give you a new commandment, that you are to love each other: that as I loved you, you too are to love each other.
35 By this all will know that you are disciples of mine, if you have love for each other. "
36 Simon Peter said to him "Sir, where are you going? "
Jesus answered "Where I am going you cannot follow me now, but later you shall. " 37 Peter said to him "Sir, why cannot I follow you now? I will lay down my life for you. "
38 Jesus answered "You will lay down your life for me? verily, verily I tell you, not a cock will crow till you have disowned me three times.
14:1-31
14 "Let your hearts not be alarmed: trust in God and trust in me.
2 In my Father’s house there are many habitations; if not, I would have told you because I go to get a place ready for you, 3 and if I go and get a place ready for you I come again and will take you home with me, that where I am you too may be.
4 And where I am going you know the way. "
5 Thomas said to him "Sir, we do not know where you are going; how do we know the way? "
6 Jesus said to him "I am the way, and the truth, and the life; nobody comes to the Father except through me.
7 If you knew me you would know my Father too. From now on you do know him and have seen him. "
8 Philip said to him "Sir, show us the Father and we are satisfied. "
9 Jesus said to him "I have been with you such a long time, and do you not know me, Philip? he who has seen me has seen the Father; how is it you are saying ‘show us the Father’? 10 Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me? the words that I say to you I do not say from myself, but the Father, abiding in me, is doing his work.
11 Take my word for it that I am in the Father and the Father is in me; or if not, believe because of the work itself.
12 Verily, verily I tell you, he who believes in me will himself do the work I do, and do greater things than these, because I am going to the Father, 13 and whatever you ask in my name, that I will do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son.
14 If you ask me anything in my name I will do it.
15 "If you love me you will keep my commandments, 16 and I will request the Father and he will give you another spokesman to be with you forever, 17 the Spirit of Truth, which the world cannot receive because it does not perceive nor know it; you know it, because it stays with you and is in you.
18 "I will not leave you bereaved; I am coming to you.
19 A little longer, and the world no longer perceives me, but you do, because I am alive and you will be.
20 On that day you will know that I am in my Father and you are in me and I am in you.
21 He who has my commandments and keeps them, he is the one that loves me.
And he who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him and manifest myself to him. "
22 Judas, not the Iscariot, said to him "And what has happened, sir, that you are going to manifest yourself to us and not to the world? "
23 Jesus replied "If one loves me he will keep what I say; and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make a home with him.
24 He who does not love me does not keep the things I say; and the thing you hear me say is not my say, but the Father’s, who sent me.
25 "These words I have spoken to you while I remained with you; 26 but the Spokesman, the Holy Spirit that the Father will send in my name, he will teach you everything and remind you of everything that I said to you.
27 "Peace I leave to you; my peace I give you; it is not as the world gives that I give to you.
Let your hearts not be alarmed nor daunted.
28 You heard me say to you ‘I am going, and coming to you.’
If you loved me you would be glad because I am going to my Father, because my Father is greater than I am.
29 And I have now been telling you before the things take place, in order that when they do you may believe.
30 "I shall not talk with you much more, for the ruler of the world is coming.
And he has no hold on me, 31 but it is in order that the world may know that I love the Father, and as the Father commanded me, so I do.
Up, let us be going from here.
15:1-27
15 "I am the true grapevine, and my Father is the farmer: 2 every branch on me that does not bear fruit he takes off, and every one that bears fruit he cleans up in order that it may bear more fruit.
3 You are clean already, because of the words I have spoken to you.
4 Remain in me and have me remain in you; as the branch cannot bear fruit from itself if it does not remain in the vine, no more can you if you do not remain in me.
5 I am the vine, you are the branches; it is just he who remains in me and has me remain in him that bears much fruit because apart from me you cannot do anything.
6 If one does not remain in me he is thrown outside like a branch and dries up, and they gather them and throw them in the fire and they are burned.
7 If you do remain in me and my words remain in you, ask for what you will and you shall have it.
8 It is in this my Father is glorified, that you should bear a great crop of fruit and turn out to be disciples of mine.
9 As the Father loved me, so did I love you; remain in my love.
10 If you keep my commands, remain in my love you will, as I have kept my Father’s commands and am remaining in his love.
11 "I have had this talk with you so that my joy may be in you and your joy be in full measure.
12 This is my command, that you are to love each other as I loved you.
13 Nobody has a greater love than this, that one should lay down his life for his friends.
14 You are friends of mine if you do what I command you to.
15 I do not speak of you as servants any longer, because a servant does not know what his master is doing; but I have spoken of you as friends, because everything that I have heard from my Father I have made known to you.
16 It was not you that chose me, but I that chose you and made you such as to go ahead and bear fruit and have your fruit persist, to have the Father give you whatever you ask him for in my name.
17 "I am giving you these commands so that you may love each other.
18 If the world hates you, you know it has hated me before you.
19 If you belonged to the world, the world would love what was its own; but because you do not belong to the world but I picked you out of the world, for that reason the world hates you.
20 Remember the words that I said to you, ‘a servant is not greater than his master’: if they persecuted me, so they will you; if they kept my words, so they will yours.
21 But all this they will do to you on account of my name, because they do not know the one who sent me.
22 If I had not come and spoken to them they would not have any sin; but now they do not have any excuse for sin.
23 He who hates me is hating my Father too.
24 If I had not done among them the works that nobody else did, they would not have any sin; but now they have both seen and hated both me and my Father; 25 but it was so that the words written in their law should be fulfilled, ‘They hated me for nothing.’ 26 When the Spokesman comes whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of Truth that goes out from the Father’s presence, he will testify about me; 27 and you too testify, because you have been with me from the first.
16:1-33
16 "I have had this talk with you so that you may not be staggered.
2 They will excommunicate you; yes, there is coming an hour in which everybody who kills you is to think he is presenting a religious service to God.
3 And these things they will do because they have not learned to know the Father nor me.
4 But I have had this talk with you so that when the hour for them comes you may remember about them, that I told you.
"But I did not tell you these things to begin with, because I was with you.
5 But now I am going to the one who sent me; and no one of you asks me ‘Where are you going?’ 6 but because I have had this talk with you grief has filled your hearts.
7 But I tell you the truth, it is to your advantage to have me leave.
For if I do not leave, the Spokesman will not come to you; but if I go I will send him to you.
8 And he, when he comes, will prove the case against the world as to wrong and as to right and as to judgment 9 as to wrong because they are not believing in me, 10 and as to right because I am going to the Father and you are seeing no more of me, 11 and as to judgment because the ruler of this world has been judged.
12 I have many more things to say to you, but you cannot carry the load now; 13 but when he, the Spirit of Truth, comes, he will guide you into all truth, for he will not speak from himself but will speak just what he hears, and will announce to you what is coming.
14 He will glorify me, because he will draw from what is mine and announce to you.
15 Everything that the Father has is mine; that is why I said he draws from what is mine and will announce to you.
16 "A little while and you are seeing no more of me, and again a little while and you will see me. "
17 So some of his disciples said to each other "What is this he is saying to us, ‘a little while and you are not seeing anything of me, and again a little while and you will see me’ and ‘because I am going to the Father’? " 18 So they said "What is this ‘little while’ he tells about? we do not know what he is driving at. "
19 Jesus knew they were wanting to ask him, and said to them "Is it about this you are discussing with each other, that I said ‘a little while and you will not see anything of me, and again a little while and you will see me’? 20 Verily, verily I tell you that you will weep and lament, but the world will rejoice; you will be grieved, but your grief will become joy.
21 When a woman is giving birth she feels grief because her time has come; but when she brings forth the child she no longer remembers the distress because of her gladness that a man has been born into the world.
22 So you too now feel grief, but I will see you again and your hearts will be glad, and your gladness nobody will take away from you.
23 And on that day you will ask nothing of me; verily, verily I tell you, if you ask the Father for anything he will give it to you in my name.
24 Up to now you have not asked for anything in my name; ask and you shall receive, that your gladness may be in full measure.
25 "In this talk with you I have spoken figuratively; a time is coming when I shall no longer speak figuratively to you but shall tell you plainly about the Father.
26 On that day you will ask in my name, and I do not tell you I will solicit the Father on your behalf, 27 for the Father himself loves you because you have loved me and have believed that I came out from the Father’s presence.
28 I came out of the Father and have come into the world; I am leaving the world again and going to the Father’s presence. "
29 His disciples said "There, now you are talking in plain language and not using any figure.
30 Now we know that you know everything and do not need to have anybody ask you; by this we believe that you came out from God. "
31 Jesus answered "You believe now? 32 here is a moment coming, and it has come, for you to scatter to look after your own interests and leave me alone; and I am not alone, because the Father is with me.
33 I have had this talk with you so that you may have peace in me.
In the world you have distress; but courage, I have defeated the world. "
17:1-26
17 This talk Jesus gave, and raised his eyes toward heaven and said "Father, the moment has come; glorify your son that your son may glorify you, 2 as you gave him jurisdiction over all mortals that to all that you have given him he might give eternal life 3 and this is what the eternal life is, that they should know you, the only true God, and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ.
4 I glorified you on earth, carrying through the work you have given me to do; 5 now glorify me in turn, Father, alongside yourself with the glory that I did have alongside you before the world was.
6 "I disclosed your name to the men you gave me out of the world.
They were yours and you gave them to me, and they have kept your word.
7 They know now that everything you have ever given me is from you, 8 because I have given them the words that you gave me, and they had accepted them and knew to a certainty that I had come out from your presence, and had faith that you had sent me.
9 I am making request on their behalf; I do not make any on behalf of the world, but on behalf of those whom you have given to me, because they are yours, 10 and everything of mine is yours and what is yours is mine, and I am glorified in them; 11 and I am no longer in the world, and they are in the world, and I am coming to you.
"Holy Father, keep them in your name that you have given to me, that they may be one just as we are.
12 When I was with them, I kept them in your name that you have given to me, and kept guard over them, and no one of them was lost except, in order that the text should be fulfilled, the one who was bound to be lost.
13 But now I am coming to you; and I am saying these things in the world that they may have my gladness brought to fullness in themselves.
14 I have given them your word, and the world hated them because they do not belong to the world just as I do not.
15 I am not asking that you take them clear out of the world, but that you keep them clear of what is bad.
16 They do not belong to the world just as I do not.
17 Consecrate them by the truth; your word is truth.
18 As you sent me into the world, so did I send them into the world; 19 and it is for them I consecrate myself, that they too may be consecrated by truth.
20 "And I ask on behalf not only of these but also of those who by their telling put faith in me, 21 that they may all be one, as you, Father, are in me and I am in you; that they too may be in us, that the world may believe that you sent me.
22 And I have given to them the glory that you have given to me, that they may be one as we are one: 23 I in them and you in me, that they may stand perfected into one, that the world may know that it was you who sent me and you loved them as you did me.
24 "What you have given me, Father I will that where I am they too be with me that they may see my glory which you have given to me because you loved me before the foundation of the world, 25 right-dealing Father; and the world did not know you, but I did, and these knew that it was you who sent me; 26 and I made known your name to them, and will make it known, that the love you had for me may be in them, and I in them. "
18:1-40
18 With that Jesus went out, with his disciples, across Kidron Arroyo, where there was a garden, which he and his disciples went into.
2 But Judas too, who was the agent in his arrest, knew about the place, because Jesus had often met with his disciples there.
3 So Judas got the cohort and some officers from the chief priests and from the Pharisees, and came there with lanterns and torches and weapons.
4 So Jesus, knowing everything that was coming upon him, went out and said to them "Whom are you looking for? " 5 They answered "Jesus the Nazarene. "
He said to them "I am the one. "
And Judas too, the agent for the arrest, was standing with them.
6 So when he said to them "I am the one " they went backward and fell to the ground.
7 So he put the question to them again "Whom are you looking for? " and they said "Jesus the Nazarene. " 8 Jesus answered "I told you I am the one; so if you are looking for me, let these go off " 9 so that the words he had said, "of those whom you had given to me I did not lose any, " should be fulfilled.
10 So Simon Peter, having a sword, drew it and hit the high priest’s slave and cut off his right ear.
And the slave’s name was Malchus.
11 So Jesus said to Peter "Put the sword in its sheath; when the Father has given me a cup am I not to drink it? "
12 So the cohort and the military tribune and the Jews’ officers arrested Jesus and bound him, 13 and took him first to Hannas; for he was father-in-law to Caiaphas, who was high priest that year.
14 And Caiaphas was the one that had advised the Jews that it was "best to have one man die for the people. " 15 And Simon Peter and another disciple followed Jesus.
And that disciple was acquainted with the high priest, and went in with Jesus into the high priest’s courtyard, 16 but Peter stood at the door outside.
So the other disciple, the one that was acquainted with the high priest, went out and spoke to the doorwoman and brought Peter in.
17 So the girl that was doorwoman said to Peter "Are you one of this man’s disciples too? "
He said "I am not. " 18 And the servants and the officers, having made a charcoal fire because it was cold, were standing and warming themselves; and Peter too was with them, standing and warming himself.
19 So the high priest asked Jesus about his disciples and about his teaching.
20 Jesus answered "I have spoken my words publicly to the world; I have always taught in synagogue and in the temple-precinct, where all the Jews come together, and have not spoken any word under cover.
21 Why do you ask me? ask those who have heard me what words I spoke to them; there they are, they know the things I said. "
22 But when he said this, one of the officers, who was standing by, gave Jesus a slap and said "Do you answer the high priest like that? " 23 Jesus answered him "If I spoke amiss, bring the charge of misspeaking; if rightly, what are you beating me for? " 24 So Hannas sent him, bound, to Caiaphas the high priest.
25 But Simon Peter was standing and warming himself.
So they said to him "Are you one of his disciples too? "
He denied it and said "I am not. " 26 One of the high priest’s servants, a relative of the one whose ear Peter had cut off, said "Didn’t I see you in the garden with him? " 27 So Peter denied again and at once a cock crowed.
28 So they took Jesus from Caiaphas to the praetorium.
It was early in the morning; and they did not go in into the praetorium, that they might not be polluted but might eat the passover.
29 So Pilate came outside to them and said "What charges do you bring against this man? " 30 They replied "If the man had not committed a crime we should not have handed him over to you. " 31 So Pilate said to them "Take him yourselves, and pass judgment on him under your law. "
The Jews said to him "We are not permitted to put anybody to death " 32 so that Jesus’s words which he had spoken, indicating what death he was to die, should be fulfilled.
33 So Pilate went in again into the praetorium and called Jesus and said to him "You are the King of the Jews? " 34 Jesus answered "Are you saying this of your own accord, or did others say it to you about me? " 35 Pilate answered "Am I a Jew?
Your nation and the chief priests handed you over to me; what had you done? "
36 Jesus answered "My kingship does not belong to this world.
If my kingship belonged to this world my subordinates would be making a fight to keep me from falling into the hands of the Jews; but in fact my kingship is not in this sphere. "
37 So Pilate said to him "Then you are a king? "
Jesus answered "As you say; I am a king.
I was born for this and have come into the world for this, that I might testify to the truth; everyone who belongs to the truth listens to my voice. "
38 Pilate said to him "What is truth? "
And with this he went out to the Jews again and said to them "I do not find any case against him.
39 But you have a custom that I should release one man for you at the passover; so do you want me to release the King of the Jews for you? " 40 So they went to shouting again, saying "Not this man but Bar-Abbas. "
And Bar-Abbas was a robber.
19:1-42
19 So then Pilate took Jesus and flogged him; 2 and the soldiers braided a wreath of thorns and set it on his head and put a purple cloak round him, 3 and came to him and said "Good morning, King of the Jews! " and gave him slaps.
4 And Pilate came outside again and said to them "Here, I am bringing him outside to you so that you may know that I do not find any case against him "; 5 so Jesus came outside wearing the thorn wreath and the purple cloak; and he said to them "There is the man! "
6 So when the chief priests and the officers saw him they went to shouting "Crucify him, crucify him! "
Pilate said to them "Take him yourselves and crucify him; for I do not find any case against him. "
7 The Jews answered "We have a law, and according to the law he ought to die, because he claimed to be God’s son. "
8 So when Pilate heard those words he was all the more afraid, 9 and went in again into the praetorium and said to Jesus "Where do you come from? " but Jesus did not give him any answer.
10 So Pilate said to him "Do you not speak to me? do you not know that I have power to release you and have power to crucify you? "
11 Jesus answered "You would not have any power at all against me if it were not given to you from above; for this reason the one who handed me over to you has the greater sin. "
12 At that Pilate made a move to release him; but the Jews went to shouting "If you release this man you are no friend to Caesar; anyone who claims to be a king is opposing Caesar. "
13 So, hearing those words, Pilate brought Jesus out and took his seat on a judgment-bench in a place called the Mosaic Pavement, or, in Hebrew, Gabbatha.
14 And it was Passover Friday.
It was about twelve o’clock; and he said to the Jews "Here is your King. " 15 So they shouted "Get him away, get him away, crucify him! "
Pilate said to them "Crucify your King? "
The chief priests answered "We have no king but Caesar. " 16 So then he turned him over to them to be crucified.
So they took Jesus over, 17 and, carrying the cross for himself, he went out to the so-called Skull-Place, of which name the Hebrew is Golgotha, 18 where they crucified him, and with him two others, one on each side and Jesus in the middle.
19 And Pilate also wrote a sign and put it on the cross; and what was written was "Jesus the Nazarene, King of the Jews. " 20 So a great many of the Jews read that sign, because the place was near the city, where Jesus was crucified, and it was written in Hebrew, in Latin, and in Greek.
21 So the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate "Do not write ‘King of the Jews,’ but that he said ‘I am King of the Jews.’ " 22 Pilate answered "What I have written I have written. "
23 So the soldiers, when they crucified Jesus, took his clothes and made four parts, a part for each soldier, and the tunic.
But the tunic was seamless, woven work all the way from the top; 24 so they said to each other "Let us not tear it, but toss for it to decide who shall have it " that the text might be fulfilled, "They divided my clothes among them and threw lots for my apparel. "
So those were the things the soldiers did.
25 But by Jesus’s cross were standing his mother and his mother’s sister, Mary the daughter of Clopas, and Mary the Magdalene.
26 So Jesus, seeing his mother and the disciple he loved standing beside her, said to his mother "Woman, there is your son "; 27 then he said to the disciple "There is your mother. "
And from that moment the disciple took her into his home.
28 After that Jesus, knowing that everything was finished now, said "I am thirsty, " in order that the text might completely come true.
29 There was a dish standing there full of vinegar; so they stuck a sponge full of the vinegar on a pilum and put it to his mouth.
30 So when Jesus had had the vinegar he said "It is finished " and bowed his head and gave up his spirit.
31 So the Jews, since it was Friday, asked Pilate, in order that the bodies might not remain on the cross on the sabbath (for that sabbath was a great day) to have their legs broken and have them taken away.
32 So the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first, and of the other who was crucified with him; 33 but when in coming to Jesus they saw he had already died, they did not break his legs, 34 but one of the soldiers ran a pike into his side, and at once blood and water came out.
35 And the one who saw it has testified, and his testimony is authentic, and he himself knows he is speaking the truth, that you too may believe.
36 For these things took place so that the text "not a bone of his is to be broken " should be fulfilled. 37 And again another text says "they shall look toward him whom they pierced. "
38 And after this was done Joseph from Arimathea, who was a disciple of Jesus but had kept it hidden for fear of the Jews, asked Pilate that he might take away Jesus’s body; and Pilate gave permission.
39 And Nicodemus too, he who had in the first place come to Jesus by night, came bringing a mixture of myrrh and eaglewood, about a hundred pounds of it.
40 So they took Jesus’s body and tied it up in lawn sheets with the spices, as it is customary among the Jews to do in burying.
41 And in the place where he was crucified there was a garden, and in the garden a new tomb in which nobody had as yet been laid; 42 so, because of the Jews’ preparation day, they laid Jesus there because the tomb was nearby.
20:1-31
20 But on the first day of the week Mary the Magdalene came to the tomb in the early morning, while it was still dark, and saw the stone had been taken away from the tomb.
2 So she ran and came to Simon Peter and the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and said to them "They have taken the Lord away out of the tomb and we do not know where they have put him. " 3 So out went Peter, and the other disciple, and they came to the tomb.
4 And the two were running together, and the other disciple outran Peter and came to the tomb first, 5 and stooped and looked in and saw the sheets lying there, but he did not go in.
6 So Simon Peter too came following him, and went into the tomb; and he saw the sheets lying there, 7 and the handkerchief that had been over his head not lying with the sheets but wrapped round and round separately in its individual place.
8 So then the other disciple too went in, the one that had come to the tomb first, and he saw and believed.
9 For they did not yet know the text that said he must rise from the dead.
10 So the disciples went off home again.
11 But Mary was standing outside by the tomb weeping.
So while she was weeping she stooped and looked into the tomb 12 and saw two angels in white sitting one at the head and one at the feet where Jesus’s body had lain; 13 and they said to her "Woman, why are you weeping? "
She said to them "Because they have taken my Lord away and I do not know where they have put him. "
14 Saying this, she turned round and saw Jesus standing there, and did not know it was Jesus.
15 Jesus said to her "Woman, why are you weeping? whom are you looking for? "
She, thinking it was the caretaker of the garden, said to him "Sir, if you have carried him off, tell me where you put him and I will take him away. "
16 Jesus said to her "Mary " She turned and said to him in Hebrew "Rabbuni! " that is to say, "Teacher! "
17 Jesus said to her "Do not touch me, for I have not yet gone up to my Father.
But go to my brothers and tell them ‘I am going to my Father, your Father, my God, your God.’ " 18 Mary the Magdalene came reporting to the disciples "I have seen the Lord " and that he had said these things to her.
19 So when it was evening on that day, the first of the week, and when the doors were shut where the disciples were, for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the middle of the company and said to them "Peace be to you "; 20 and with that he showed them his hands and his side.
So the disciples were glad to see the Lord.
21 So Jesus said to them again "Peace be to you.
In the same way as the Father has sent me out, I am sending you "; 22 and with that he poured a breath over them and said to them "Take Holy Spirit.
23 If you forgive anybody’s sins he has them forgiven; if you condemn anybody’s they are condemned. "
24 But Thomas, one of the Twelve, known as the Twin, was not with them when Jesus came.
25 So the other disciples said to him "We have seen the Lord. "
But he said to them "Unless I see in his hands the mark of the nails and put my finger into the mark of the nails and put my hand into his side I will not believe. " 26 And one week later the disciples were in there again, and Thomas with them; Jesus came while the doors were shut and stood in the middle of the company and said "Peace be to you. " 27 Then he said to Thomas "Bring on your finger and see about my hands, and bring your hand and put it into my side; and do not be a disbeliever but a believer. " 28 Thomas answered him "My Lord and my God! " 29 Jesus said to him "Because you have seen you have believed, have you?
Happy are those who did not see and believed. "
30 Many more tokens Jesus did before the disciples, which are not written down in this book; 31 but these have been written down, in order that you may believe that Jesus is the Messiah, the Son of God, and that, believing, you may have life by his name.
21:1-25
21 After this Jesus made himself visible to the disciples again at the sea of Tiberias.
And he did it thus: 2 There were together Simon Peter and Thomas known as the Twin and Nathanael of Cana in Galilee and the sons of Zebedee and two more of his disciples; 3 Simon Peter said to them "I am going fishing "; they said to him "We are coming too. "
They went out and got into the boat, and in that night they caught nothing.
4 But when the morning was already breaking Jesus made his appearance standing on the beach; the disciples did not know, however, that it was Jesus.
5 So Jesus said to them "Boys, have you caught any? "
They answered "No. " 6 But he said to them "Throw the net to the right of the boat and you will. "
So they threw, and were not able to haul it in again because of the quantity of fish.
7 So the aforesaid disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter "It is the Lord. "
So Simon Peter, hearing that it was the Lord, tied his cape on as a loincloth, for he was naked, and threw himself into the sea.
8 But the other disciples came in the boat (for they were not far from the land, but about a hundred yards), dragging the netful of fish.
9 So when they stepped ashore they saw a bed of coals and a fish lying on it, and a cake of bread.
10 Jesus said to them "Bring some of the fish you have just caught. " 11 So Simon Peter went aboard and hauled the net ashore full of large fishes, a hundred and fifty-three of them; and, many as there were, the net did not tear.
12 Jesus said to them "Come and have breakfast. "
The disciples did not any of them dare to challenge him with "Who are you? " knowing that it was the Lord.
13 Jesus came and took the bread and passed it to them, and the fish too.
14 This made the third time Jesus had made himself visible to the disciples since he rose from the dead.
15 So when they had had their breakfast Jesus said to Simon Peter "Simon son of John, do you care more for me than for this? "
He said to him "Yes, sir, you know that I love you. " He said to him "Tend my lambs! "
16 He said to him again a second time "Simon son of John, do you care for me? "
He said to him "Yes, sir, you know that I love you. " He said to him "Shepherd my sheep! "
17 He said to him the third time "Simon son of John, do you love me? "
Peter was pained that the third time he had said to him "Do you love me? " and said to him "Sir, you know everything, you know that I love you. "
Jesus said to him "Tend my sheep! 18 Verily, verily I tell you, when you were a young man you put on your belt and walked where you wanted to; but when you come to be old you will stretch out your hands and somebody else will put a belt round you and carry you where you do not want him to. "
19 This he said indicating by what sort of death he would glorify God.
And with that he said to him "Follow me. "
20 Peter turned round and saw the disciple that Jesus loved following, the same who at the dinner leaned back on his breast and said "Sir, who is the one to have you arrested? " 21 So, seeing him, Peter said to Jesus "And how about him, sir? " 22 Jesus said to him "If I want him to stay till I come, what is it to you? follow me yourself. " 23 So this saying went out among the brothers, that that disciple was not to die.
But Jesus did not say to him that he was not to die, but "If I want him to stay till I come. " 24 This is the disciple who testifies about these things and who wrote these things down; and we know that his testimony is true.
25 And there are many more things that Jesus did; if those are each one written down I do not think there will be room in the world itself for the books that are going to be written.
Acts
1:1-26
1 I made my first relation, Theophilus, about all that Jesus had begun both doing and teaching 2 as far as to the day that he was taken up after he had by the Holy Spirit given injunctions to the apostles whom he had chosen; 3 to whom also, after he had suffered, he presented himself alive with many proofs, appearing to them during forty days and telling them the things that relate to the Reign of God; 4 and, while eating with them, he instructed them not to leave Jerusalem, but to "await the Father’s promise, which you heard from me, 5 ‘John baptized with water but you shall be baptized in Holy Spirit,’ not many days from now. " 6 So those who were together asked him "Lord, is it during this time that you restore the sovereignty to Israel? " 7 He said to them, "It is not yours to know times and dates, which the Father has put under his own jurisdiction.
8 But you shall receive power, having the Holy Spirit come upon you, and shall be witnesses for me both in Jerusalem and throughout Judea and Samaria and to the remotest part of the earth. " 9 And, having said this, he was lifted up before their eyes, and a cloud received him out of their sight.
10 And while they had their gaze fixed on the sky as he went, lo, there were two men in white costumes standing by them; 11 who said, "Men of Galilee, why are you standing and looking up into the sky? this Jesus who has been taken up from you into the sky shall come in the same way as you viewed him going into the sky. " 12 Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mountain known as Olivet, which is near Jerusalem, a sabbath-day’s journey off; 13 and when they came in they went up to the upper room where they were keeping themselves: Peter and John and James and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James son of Alpheus and Simon the Zealot and Judas son of James.
14 All these were unitedly devoting themselves to prayer, with the women and Jesus’s mother Mary, and with his brothers.
15 And in those days Peter stood up among the brothers and said, there being together a multitude of names, about a hundred and twenty: 16 "Brethren, the text which the Holy Spirit uttered beforehand through the mouth of David about Judas who was guide to those who arrested Jesus, 17 that he was counted among us and was allotted this commission, had to be fulfilled. " 18 (Now this man acquired a piece of land with the pay of his misdoing; and, coming down flat, he burst open in the middle, and all his entrails gushed out; 19 and it became well known to all who lived in Jerusalem, so that that piece of land was called in their language "Hakeldamach, " that is "the blood lot. ") 20 "For it is written in the book of Psalms ‘May his homestead be desolate and have no one living in it,’ and ‘Let another take his office.’ 21 So of the men who went with us at every time when the Lord Jesus was among us coming in and going out, 22 beginning with John’s baptizing and down to the day that he was taken up from us, one of these must become a witness of his resurrection with us. " 23 And they put forward two, Joseph known as Bar-Sabbas, who was also named Justus, and Matthias; 24 and they offered prayer, and said "Lord, knower of the hearts of all, do thou designate the one of these two whom thou hast called 25 to take the place in this commission and apostleship, from which Judas passed to go to his own place. " 26 And they took lots for them, and the lot fell upon Matthias, and he was counted in with the eleven apostles.
2:1-47
2 And when the day of Pentecost came around they were all in company together, 2 and suddenly there came a noise out of the sky, as if of a violent wind driving along, and filled the whole house where they were sitting; 3 and there appeared to them parted tongues as if of fire, and it lighted on each one of them; 4 and all of them were filled with Holy Spirit and began to speak in other tongues as the Spirit granted it to them.
5 And there were Jews living in Jerusalem, godly men from every nation under the heavens; 6 and when this sound came the multitude came together and were bewildered that each one heard them speaking his own language.
7 And they were surprised, and they wondered, saying "Why, here all these that are talking are Galileans, 8 and how is it we each hear in our own language that we were born in? 9 Parthians and Medes and Elamites and inhabitants of Mesopotamia and of Palestine and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia 10 and Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the parts in Africa about Cyrene; and the Romans, both Jews and proselytes, who are residing here; 11 Cretans and Arabs, we hear them speaking in our languages the grand works of God. " 12 And they were all of them surprised and puzzled, saying one to another "What may this be? " 13 but others said jeeringly "They are filled up with grape-juice. "
14 But Peter stood forward with the eleven and raised his voice and uttered these words to them: "Fellow-Jews, and all you who live in Jerusalem, be this known to you, and give ear to my words.
15 For these men are not, as you assume, drunk; for it is three hours before noon; 16 but this is what was spoken of through the prophet Joel, 17 ‘And in the last days, says God, I will pour out streams of my Spirit on all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, 18 and your young men shall see visions and your old men shall dream dreams; yea, and on my servants, both men and women, will I pour out streams of my Spirit in those days, and they shall prophesy.
19 And I will display wonders in the heavens above and tokens on the earth beneath, blood and fire and fumes of smoke: 20 the sun shall be turned to darkness and the moon to blood before the great and notable Day of the Lord comes.
21 And everyone who shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved.’
22 "Men of Israel, listen to these words: Jesus the Nazarene, a man accredited to you by God through miracles and wonders and tokens which God did through him in your midst, as you yourselves know, 23 this man, given up by God’s deliberate plan and foreknowledge, you by ruffians’ hands spiked down, and took his life; 24 whom God raised, undoing the pangs of death, as it was not possible that he should be held by it.
25 For David says with reference to him ‘I looked to the Lord before me continually, because he is at my right hand that I may not be shaken.
26 At this my heart is happy and my tongue exults; and withal my flesh shall dwell in hope, 27 because thou wilt not abandon my soul to the realm of death, nor give thy godly one to see decay.
28 Thou hast made known to me the paths of life; thou wilt fill me full of happiness, with thy presence.’
29 Brethren, it is allowable to say to you frankly of David, the founder of our state, that he did pass away and was buried, and his tomb is among us to this day.
30 Therefore, being a prophet and knowing that God had sworn an oath to him to seat on his throne one of the fruit of his loins, 31 he foresaw and spoke of the resurrection of the Christ, that he neither was abandoned to the realm of death nor did his flesh see decay.
32 This Jesus God raised to life; of which we are all of us witnesses.
33 So, being raised on high by God’s right hand and having received from the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which you both see and hear.
34 For David did not ascend to heaven, but he himself says ‘The Lord said to my lord "Sit at my right hand 35 till I make your enemies a footstool for your feet. "’ 36 So let all the house of Israel know positively that God has made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus whom you crucified. "
37 And at hearing it they were pricked in their hearts, and said to Peter and the rest of the apostles "What shall we do, brethren? " 38 And Peter said to them "Repent, and each of you be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the pardoning of your sins, and you shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.
39 For the promise is for you and for your children and for all who are far off, as many as the Lord our God shall call. " 40 And with many other words he testified and exhorted them, saying "Save yourselves from this cross-grained generation. "
41 So those who welcomed his words were baptized, and there were added on that day about three thousand souls; 42 and they applied themselves to the apostles’ teaching and to the life of solidarity, to bread-breaking and to prayers.
43 And every soul was seized with fear, and many wonders and tokens were done through the apostles.
44 And all who believed had everything in common together, 45 and would sell their possessions and estates and portion them out to all as anyone needed them; 46 and day by day, unitedly attending in the temple-precinct and breaking bread at home, they partook of their food with blithe and simple hearts, 47 praising God and enjoying the favor of all the people; and the Lord added greatly day by day to the saved.
3:1-26
3 And Peter and John were going up into the temple-precinct for the three o’clock prayer, 2 and there was being carried away a certain man who had been a cripple from his birth, whom they put at what is known as the Beautiful Gate of the temple-precinct day by day to ask for charity from those who were going into the precinct; 3 and he, seeing Peter and John about to enter the precinct, asked to receive charity.
4 But Peter, fixing his eyes on him with John, said "Look at us. " 5 And he eyed them, expecting to receive something from them.
6 But Peter said "Silver and gold I do not own, but what I have, that I give you: by the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene, walk! " 7 and he caught hold of his right hand and got him to rise.
And immediately his feet and ankles grew firm, 8 and he gave a jump and stood and walked, and came in with them into the precinct walking and jumping and praising God, 9 and all the people saw him walking and praising God.
10 And they recognized him as the one who had been sitting at the Beautiful Gate of the temple for charity, and were filled with amazement and surprise at what had befallen him.
11 And while he held Peter and John all the people came running together about them in what is known as Solomon’s Portico, utterly amazed.
12 And, seeing this, Peter answered by saying to the people "Men of Israel, why are you wondering at this, or fixing your eyes on us as if by our own power or piety we had caused him to walk? 13 The God of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, the God of our fathers, has glorified his servant Jesus, whom you had had arrested and had repudiated in Pilate’s presence when he had passed judgment for releasing him 14 but you repudiated the Holy and Righteous and asked to have a murderer granted to you, 15 and killed the Founder of Life; whom God raised from the dead, of which we are witnesses.
16 And upon faith in his name he has put firmness into the limbs of this man whom you see and know; and the faith that comes through him has given him this absolute soundness before you all.
17 And now, brothers, I know you acted in ignorance, and so did your rulers; 18 but what God had announced beforehand through the mouths of all the prophets, that his Christ should suffer, he thus fulfilled.
19 So repent and turn back so as to have your sins wiped out, that seasons of refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord 20 and that he may send the Christ appointed for you, Jesus, 21 whom heaven must receive until the times for putting into effect everything that God has spoken of through the mouths of his holy prophets from of old.
22 Moses said ‘The Lord God will raise up for you from among your brothers a prophet, like me; to him you shall listen in everything that he speaks of to you; 23 and every soul that does not listen to that prophet shall be rooted out from the people’; 24 and so did all the prophets, from Samuel on, as many as spoke, announce these days.
25 You are the sons of the prophets, and of the covenant that God made with your fathers, saying to Abraham ‘And in your descendants all the clans of the earth shall be blessed.’ 26 For you first God raised up his Servant and sent him to bless you by turning you each away from your crimes. "
4:1-37
4 And while they were speaking to the people, in came the priests and the provost of the temple and the Sadducees, 2 nettled because they were teaching the people and announcing resurrection from the dead in the case of Jesus, 3 and laid hands on them and put them in custody till the next day, for it was already evening.
4 But many of those who had heard the word believed, and the number, of men, came to be about five thousand.
5 But on the next day their rulers and elders and scribes met at Jerusalem, 6 and High Priest Hannas and Caiaphas and Jonathan and Alexander and as many as came of high-priestly family, 7 and they set them in the middle and inquired "By what power or by what name did you do that? " 8 Then Peter, filled with Holy Spirit, said to them "Rulers of the people and elders, 9 if we are today being examined as to a benefit done to a sick man, by whose means he has been made well, 10 be it known to you all and to all the people of Israel that it is just by the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene, whom you crucified, whom God raised from the dead, that this man stands here before you sound and well.
11 This is the stone scorned by you the builders, that has come to be the top of the corner.
12 And by nothing else is there salvation for there is not another name under the heavens, given among men, that we must be saved by. "
13 And, seeing the outspokenness of Peter and John, and perceiving that they were plain illiterate men, they wondered at it; and they recognized them as having been with Jesus; 14 and, seeing the cured man standing with them, they were not able to say anything against it.
15 But, giving orders that they should go outside the session, they conferred with each other, 16 saying "What shall we do with these men? that an evident token has been done through them is apparent to all who live in Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it; 17 but, that it may not spread widely among the people, let us warn them with threats not to talk in this name again to any human being. "
18 And they called them and enjoined them not to speak nor teach in the name of Jesus at all.
19 But Peter and John answered them "Decide whether it is a right thing before God to listen more to you than to God; 20 for we cannot help telling what we have seen and heard. " 21 And they made additional threats and released them, no way to punish them being found because of the people, since they were all glorifying God over what had taken place; 22 for the man on whom this token of healing was done was more than forty years old.
23 And, being released, they came to their own company and reported everything the chief priests and elders had said to them; 24 and they, upon hearing it, unanimously raised their voices to God and said
"Master, thou who madest the heavens and the earth and the sea and everything in them! 25 As our father thy servant David said by direction of the Holy Spirit, ‘Why have nations blustered and peoples studied useless plans, 26 the kings of the earth taken their stand and the rulers met together, against the Lord and against his anointed?’ for against thy holy servant Jesus, whom thou anointedst, 27 both Herod and Pontius Pilate did certainly meet in this city, with nations and the peoples of Israel, 28 to do so much as thy hand and plan had foreordained should come to pass.
29 And now, Lord, turn thy eye upon their threats, and grant thy servants the gift of speaking thy word with all boldness 30 while thou dost stretch out thy hand for healing, and tokens and wonders are done through the name of thy holy son Jesus. " 31 And when they had prayed the place where they were met shook, and one and all were filled with the Holy Spirit and spoke God’s word with boldness.
32 And the community of believers was one in heart and soul, and not one said that any of his property was his own, but they had everything in common; 33 and with great power the apostles gave their testimony to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus; and there was great grace upon them all, 34 nor was there anybody in want among them.
For such as were owners of lands or houses offered them for sale, 35 and brought the price of what were sold and laid it at the apostles’ feet, and distribution was made to each as he needed.
36 And Joseph, also named Barnabas by the apostles (which means Son of Encouragement), a Levite, a Cypriote by nationality, 37 being the owner of a field, sold it and brought the amount and laid it at the apostles’ feet.
5:1-42
5 But a certain man, Hananiah by name, with his wife Shappirah, sold a piece of property 2 and pocketed some of the price, the wife also being in the secret, and brought a part and laid it at the apostles’ feet.
3 But Peter said "Hananiah, why has Satan filled your heart to play false with the Holy Spirit and pocket part of the price of the lot? 4 While you kept it was it not in your possession, and when it was sold was it not at your disposal? how came it you resolved on this thing? you did not lie to men but to God. " 5 And Hananiah, hearing these words, fell down and expired; and great fear came upon all who heard of it.
6 And the juniors rose and wrapped him up, and carried him out and buried him.
7 And after an interval of about three hours his wife came in, not knowing what had happened; 8 and Peter answered her "Tell me if you sold the lot for so much, " and she said "Yes, so much. " 9 And Peter said to her "How came it you agreed with each other to put the Spirit of the Lord to the test? there are the feet of those who buried your husband coming to the door, and they shall carry you out. " 10 And immediately she fell down at his feet and expired; and the young men came in and found her dead, and carried her out and buried her with her husband.
11 And great fear came upon the whole church and upon all who heard of these things.
12 And through the agency of the apostles many tokens and wonders were done among the people; and they were one and all in Solomon’s Portico backing each other up.
13 And of the rest nobody dared connect himself with them; but the people held them in high regard, 14 and there were more and more additions of masses of both men and women, believing in the Lord, 15 so that they even carried the sick out into the squares and laid them on cots and pallets in order that when Peter came at least his shadow might fall on one or another of them.
16 And the populace of the suburbs of Jerusalem also came together, bringing sick people and people harassed by unclean spirits, of whom one and all were cured.
17 But Annas the high priest and all those who were with him, who constituted the Sadducee party, were seized with jealousy 18 and laid hands on the apostles and put them in custody.
19 But an angel of the Lord opened the doors of the prison and brought them out and said 20 "Go stand forward in the temple-precinct and speak to the people all the words that proclaim this life "; 21 and, hearing this, they went into the temple-precinct at dawn and taught there.
But when the high priest arrived, and those who were with him, they called together the Sanhedrin and all the senate of the sons of Israel, and sent to the lockup to have them brought.
22 But the officers who came did not find them in the prison, but brought back word 23 "We found the lockup most securely locked and the guards standing at the doors, but on opening it we found nobody inside. " 24 And when the provost of the temple and the chief priests heard these words, they were puzzled about them, to know what it was that had happened.
25 But someone came and reported to them "Here, the men you put in the prison are in the temple-precinct, standing there and teaching the people. " 26 Then the provost went with the officers and brought them; not with violence, for they were afraid of the people, that they would be stoned.
27 And they brought them to the Sanhedrin and set them before it; and the high priest questioned them, 28 saying "We positively enjoined you not to teach in this name, and here you have filled Jerusalem with your teaching and are wanting to make us responsible for this man’s blood. " 29 And Peter and the apostles answered "We must obey God rather than men.
30 The God of our fathers raised Jesus, whom you made away with by hanging him on a tree; 31 him God has raised on high by his right hand as supreme lord and savior, to give Israel repentance and the pardon of sins.
32 And we are witnesses of these matters, and the Holy Spirit that God has given to those who obey him. "
33 And at hearing it they were nettled and wanted to take their lives.
34 But a certain Pharisee in the Sanhedrin, Gamaliel by name, a teacher of the law highly honored by all the people, gave the word to put the men out a little while, 35 and said to them "Men of Israel, take care what you are going to do in the matter of these men.
36 For a while ago Theudas stood up, saying he was somebody; whose cause some four hundred men espoused, but who lost his life, and all who had put faith in him disbanded, and nothing came of it.
37 And after him Judas the Galilean stood up during the time of the registration, and induced a set to go off with him; he too perished, and all who had put faith in him were dispersed.
38 And this time I say keep clear of these men and let them be, because if this plan or this doing be from men it will break down, 39 but if it is from God you will not be able to break them down; you may turn out to be at war with God. " 40 And they took his advice, and called in the apostles, and gave them a beating and enjoined them not to speak in Jesus’s name, and let them go.
41 So they went from the presence of the Sanhedrin rejoicing because they were held worthy to suffer insult for the Name; 42 and every day, in the temple-precinct and at home, they never left off teaching and telling the gospel of Christ Jesus.
6:1-15
6 And in those days, as the disciples increased in number, there came to be a grumbling of the Greek-speaking members against the Hebrews, that their widows were disregarded in the daily distribution.
2 And the Twelve called in the body of disciples and said "It is not desirable that we should leave God’s word and act as bank-tellers.
3 But, brothers, nominate out of your number seven men of attested reputations, whom we will appoint to this duty; 4 and we will devote ourselves to prayer and the distribution of the word. " 5 And all the body approved the idea, and they selected Stephen, a man full of faith and Holy Spirit, and Philip and Prochorus and Nicanor and Timon and Parmenas and Nicolaus, an Antiochene proselyte, 6 all of whom they set before the apostles, and they prayed and laid their hands on them.
7 And the word of God grew, and the numbers of the disciples at Jerusalem increased extremely, and a great mass of the priests yielded obedience to the faith.
8 And Stephen, full of grace and power, did great wonders and tokens among the people.
9 But some from what is known as the Freedmen’s Synagogue, and some of the Cyrenians and Alexandrians and those from Cilicia and Asia, stood up to debate with Stephen, 10 and were not able to stand their ground against the wisdom and inspiration by which he spoke.
11 Then they put out men who said "We have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses and God " 12 and stirred up the people and the elders and the scribes, and came down on him and carried him off and brought him into the Sanhedrin, 13 and produced false witnesses who said "This man never stops uttering words against the holy place and the law; 14 for we have heard him say that this Nazarene Jesus is to break down this place and to change the usages that Moses handed down to us. "
15 And all those who were sitting in the Sanhedrin fixed their eyes on him and saw his face looking as if it were an angel’s.
7:1-60
7 And the high priest said "Are these things so? " 2 And he said "Brethren and fathers, listen.
"The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia, before he lived in Harran, 3 and said to him ‘Come out from your country and your kin, and come to the country I will show you.’ 4 Then he went out from the country of the Chaldeans and lived in Harran.
And from there, after his father was dead, God had him move to this country you are living in now, 5 and did not give him inheritance enough in it even to set his foot on; and he promised to give it to him as a possession, and to his descendants after him when he had no child.
6 But God spoke in this way: that his descendants should live the life of immigrants in an alien country, and they should enslave this posterity and ill-treat it four hundred years; 7 ‘and the nation they are in slavery to I will judge,’ said God, ‘and after that they shall come out and worship me in this place’; 8 and he gave him the covenant of circumcision.
And thus he had his son Isaac and circumcised him on the eighth day, and Isaac Jacob, and Jacob the twelve founders of the tribes.
9 And the Founders, becoming jealous of Joseph, sold him down to Egypt; and God was with him, 10 and rescued him out of all his distresses, and gave him favor and wisdom before the Pharaoh, the king of Egypt, and he appointed him ruler over Egypt and over all his household.
11 "And there came a famine all over Egypt and Canaan, and great distress; and our fathers could not find enough to eat.
12 And Jacob, hearing that there were breadstufs in Egypt, sent out our fathers a first time; 13 and at the second sending Joseph’s identity was made known to his brothers, and the Pharaoh discovered Joseph’s race.
14 And Joseph sent and had his father Jacob come, and all his kin, numbering seventy-five souls.
15 And Jacob went down to Egypt, and passed away, he and our fathers, 16 and were conveyed to Shekem and put in the tomb that Abraham had bought for a cash price from the sons of Hamor at Shekem.
17 "But as the time of the promise God had given to Abraham approached, the people grew and multiplied in Egypt 18 until there came up over Egypt another king who did not know Joseph; 19 he, laying a shrewd plan against our race, maltreated our fathers in having their babies exposed so that they should not be kept alive.
20 At which time was born Moses, and was divinely pretty; who was nurtured three months in his father’s home, 21 and when he was exposed the Pharaoh’s daughter took him up and raised him as her son.
22 And Moses was educated in all the science of the Egyptians, and was powerful in his words and deeds.
23 And when he was completing a span of forty years it came into his mind to visit his brothers the sons of Israel, 24 and, seeing one suffering a wrong, he took the part of the maltreated man and did vengeance for him, striking down the Egyptian.
25 And he supposed his brothers understood that by his hand God was giving them salvation; but they did not.
26 And on the following day he appeared to them as they were fighting, and was pacifying them, saying ‘Boys, you are brothers; what do you wrong each other for?’ 27 But he who was wronging his fellow rebuffed him, saying ‘Who appointed you chief justice over us? 28 are you meaning to take my life the same as you took the Egyptian’s yesterday?’ 29 And Moses took flight at those words, and settled as an immigrant in the country of Midian, where he became the father of two sons.
30 "And when forty years had elapsed there appeared to him in the desert of Mount Sinai an angel in a flame of fire in a bush.
31 And Moses, seeing it, wondered at the sight; but as he came up to it to look at it the Lord’s voice came, 32 ‘I am the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob,’ and Moses, with his flesh creeping, dared not look.
33 And the Lord said to him ‘Unfasten the shoes from your feet; for the place you are standing on is sacred ground.
34 I have seen how my people in Egypt are maltreated, and heard their groaning, and come down to rescue them; now come, let me send you to Egypt.’
35 "This Moses whom they had repudiated, saying ‘Who appointed you chief justice over us?’ him God has sent as both chief and redeemer with the hand of the angel that had appeared to him in the bush.
36 This man brought them out, doing wonders and tokens in Egypt and at the Red Sea and in the wilderness for forty years.
37 This was the Moses who said to the sons of Israel ‘God will raise up for you from among your brothers a prophet, like me.’ 38 This was the one who was in the congregation in the wilderness with the angel that spoke to him on Mount Sinai and with our fathers; he who received living sayings to give to us; 39 to whom our fathers would not yield obedience, but rebuffed him and turned round to Egypt in their hearts, 40 saying to Aaron ‘Make us gods who shall go before us; for we do not know what has become of that Moses who brought us out of Egypt’; 41 and they made a calf in those days and offered sacrifice to the idol, and jubilated in the work of their hands.
42 But God turned and gave them up to worship the host of the sky, as it is written in the book of the prophets ‘Did you offer me slaughtered beasts and sacrifices forty years in the wilderness, house of Israel? 43 and you took up the tent of Moloch and the star of the god Rephan, the figures you had made to do reverence to and I will remove you beyond Babylon.’
44 "Our fathers had the Tabernacle of the Testimony in the wilderness, as he who spoke to Moses prescribed that he should make it in conformity with the figure he had seen; 45 which same our fathers, succeeding to it, brought in with Joshua at the dispossession of the nations God expelled before our fathers, till the days of David; 46 who found favor before God and asked to find a dwelling for the God of Jacob.
47 And Solomon built him a house.
48 But the Most High does not live in man-made abodes, not he; as the prophet says 49 ‘I have the sky for throne, and the earth is the footstool for my feet; what house will you build me, says the Lord? or what is the place for my rest? 50 did not my hand make all this?’
51 "Stiff-necked men, uncircumcised in hearts and ears, you are always throwing yourselves against the Holy Spirit, you the same as your fathers.
52 Which of the prophets did your fathers not persecute, and kill those who announced beforehand about the coming of the Righteous One whose betrayers and murderers you have now become? 53 you who received the law for the prescriptions of angels and did not keep it! "
54 And, hearing this, they were nettled at heart and ground their teeth at him.
55 But, being full of Holy Spirit, he fixed his eyes on the sky and saw God’s glory and Jesus standing at God’s right hand, 56 and said "Here I see the skies opened and the Son of Man standing at God’s right hand. " 57 But they cried out loudly and stopped their ears and rushed upon him like one man, 58 and took him out outside the city and stoned him.
And the witnesses laid off their cloaks at the feet of a young man named Saul 59 and stoned Stephen, while he invoked the Lord and said "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit. " 60 And he knelt down and cried out loudly "Lord, do not count this sin against them "; and with that he went to his rest.
8:1-40
8 And Saul approved of his lynching.
And on that day a great persecution broke out against the church in Jerusalem; and they dispersed through the country districts of Judea and Samaria, all but the apostles.
2 But godly men gave Stephen a funeral and made a great wailing over him.
3 But Saul committed atrocities against the church, making house-to-house searches, and dragged off men and women to be committed to prison.
4 So those who dispersed in different directions went along spreading the word.
5 And Philip came down to the city of Samaria and preached Christ to them; 6 and the crowds to a man listened respectfully to what Philip said, as they heard and saw the tokens he exhibited.
7 For many of those who had unclean spirits had them come out, shrieking loudly; and many paralytics and cripples were cured; 8 and there was great rejoicing in that city.
9 But there was in the city before them a certain man, Simon by name, playing the magician and surprising the nation of Samaria and saying he was somebody great, 10 to whom they all looked up, great and small, saying "This man is a Power of God, what is called the Great Power. " 11 And they looked up to him because he had for a considerable time been surprising them with his magic tricks.
12 But when they believed Philip as he brought them word of the Reign of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they had themselves baptized, both men and women.
13 And Simon himself also believed, and, having had himself baptized, was a constant attendant at Philip’s preaching, and was surprised at seeing great tokens and miracles done.
14 And the apostles at Jerusalem, hearing that Samaria had accepted the word of God, sent Peter and John to them; 15 and they came down and prayed for them that they might receive Holy Spirit 16 (for it had not yet fallen on any of them, and they only had their baptism into the name of the Lord Jesus).
17 Then they laid their hands on them and they received Holy Spirit.
18 And Simon, seeing that the Spirit was given through the laying on of the apostles’ hands, offered them a fee, 19 saying "Give me too this faculty, that anyone I lay my hands on may receive Holy Spirit. " 20 But Peter said to him "Your money go to destruction, and you with it, because you supposed you would get God’s gift with a fee.
21 You have no portion nor lot in this matter; for your heart is not straightforward before God.
22 So repent of this viciousness of yours, and pray the Lord and see if you may be forgiven the idea you conceived; 23 for I see you are in the gall of bitterness and the tie of wrongness. " 24 And Simon answered "Pray to the Lord for me, you, that there may not come upon me any of the things you have said. "
25 So they, having given their testimony and spoken the word of the Lord, turned back to Jerusalem, and gave the gospel to many villages of the Samaritans.
26 But an angel of the Lord spoke to Philip, saying "Up, go southward to the road that goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza; that is desert "; 27 and he stood up and went.
And along came an Ethiopian, a powerful eunuch of Candace the queen of the Ethiopians, her treasurer-general, who had been up to Jerusalem to do reverence; 28 and he was on his way back, riding in his chariot, and was reading the prophet Isaiah.
29 And the Spirit said to Philip "Make up to that chariot and join it "; 30 and Philip ran up, and heard him reading the prophet Isaiah, and said "Do you get the meaning of what you are reading? " 31 and he said "Why, how could I, unless somebody puts me on the track? " and he invited Philip to get in and ride with him.
32 And the matter of the text he was reading was this: "He was led like a sheep to slaughtering; and like a lamb mute before its shearer, so he does not open his mouth.
33 In his lowly condition his judgment was taken away; and of his generation who shall tell the story? because his life is taken away from the earth. " 34 And the eunuch answered Philip "Please, about whom is the prophet saying this? about himself or about somebody else? " 35 And Philip opened his mouth and started from this text and told him the gospel of Jesus.
36 And as they were going along the road they came to a bit of water, and the eunuch said "Here is water; what hinders my being baptized? " 37 38 And he gave orders for the chariot to halt, and they both went down into the water, both Philip and the eunuch, and he baptized him.
39 But when they came up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord snatched Philip away, and the eunuch saw no more of him, for he went joyously on his way.
40 But Philip turned up at Ashdod; and as he went along he brought the gospel to all the cities till he came to Cesarea.
9:1-43
9 But Saul, still breathing threat and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest 2 and asked him for letters to the synagogues at Damascus, so that he might bring to Jerusalem in fetters whomever he found to be followers of the Path, both men and women.
3 And as he went on his way he came to be nearing Damascus, when all of a sudden a light flashed round him from the sky, 4 and he fell on the ground and heard a voice say to him "Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me? " 5 And he said "Who are you, sir? "
And he said "I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting.
6 But stand up and go into the city, and you will be told what you must do. " 7 And his traveling-companions stood speechless, hearing the voice but not seeing anybody.
8 And Saul rose from the ground, but when his eyes were open he could see nothing; and they brought him into Damascus leading him by the hand.
9 And he was three days unable to see, and did not eat nor drink.
10 But there was in Damascus a certain disciple, by name Hananiah, and the Lord said to him in a vision "Hananiah! " and he said "Here I am, Lord. " 11 And the Lord said to him "Stand up and go to the street known as Straight Street, and look at Judah’s house for a Tarsus man, Saul by name; for he is praying, 12 and has seen a man named Hananiah come in and lay his hands on him so that he may recover his sight. " 13 And Hananiah answered "Lord, I have heard about this man from a great many people, how much harm he has done at Jerusalem to thy holy ones; 14 and here he has authority from the chief priests to throw into fetters all who invoke thy name. " 15 But the Lord said to him "Go, because this man is the instrument of my choice to carry my name before nations and kings and the sons of Israel; 16 for I will let him know how much he must suffer for my name. " 17 And Hananiah went, and came into the house and laid his hands on him and said "Brother Saul, the Lord has sent me, Jesus that appeared to you on the road as you were coming, so that you might recover your sight and be filled with Holy Spirit. " 18 And at once it was as if scales dropped off from his eyes; and he recovered his sight, and rose and was baptized, 19 and took food and rallied.
And he was with the disciples at Damascus for some days, 20 and at once preached Jesus in the synagogues, saying "This is the Son of God. " 21 And all who heard it were surprised, and said "Is not this the one who had ravaged at Jerusalem those who invoked this name, and had come here for this purpose, to bring them in fetters before the chief priests? " 22 But Saul grew more and more vigorous, and discomfited the Jews of Damascus, demonstrating that this is the Messiah.
23 But when several days had elapsed, the Jews plotted to take his life; 24 but their plot became known to Saul.
And they also watched the gates day and night in order to take his life; 25 but his disciples took him and got him down through the wall by night, lowering him in a basket.
26 And he arrived in Jerusalem and tried to join the disciples; and they were all afraid of him, not believing that he was a disciple.
27 But Barnabas took him and brought him to the apostles, and told them the story of how he had seen the Lord on the road, and his having spoken to him, and how he had spoken out in the name of Jesus at Damascus; 28 and he was with them going in and out of Jerusalem, speaking out in the Lord’s name.
29 And he talked and debated with the Greek-speaking Jews; but they undertook to take his life; 30 and the brothers, becoming cognizant of it, took him down to Cesarea and sent him off to Tarsus.
31 So the church throughout Judea and Galilee and Samaria was left in peace, being built up and walking in the fear of the Lord, and it multiplied by the encouragement of the Holy Spirit.
32 And it so befell that as Peter went along through all parts of the community, among the rest he came down to the people of God at Lydda.
33 And he found there a certain man, Eneas by name, who had been lying abed for eight years, being paralyzed.
34 And Peter said to him "Eneas, Jesus Christ cures you; get up and make your bed "; and at once he got up.
35 And all who lived in Lydda and Sharon saw him; who turned back to the Lord.
36 And in Joppa there was a certain disciple, Tabitha by name, which is to say in English "Gazelle "; she was full of actions of kindness and charity that she used to do.
37 And it happened in those days that she fell sick and died; and they washed her and laid her in an upper room; 38 and, as Lydda was near Joppa, the disciples, hearing that Peter was there, sent two men to him with the appeal "Do not fail to come right on to us. " 39 And Peter rose and went with them; and when he arrived they took him up to the room, and all the widows presented themselves to him weeping and pointing to their dresses and cloaks that the Gazelle made while she was with them.
40 But Peter put everybody out and knelt down and prayed, and turned around to the body and said "Tabitha, stand up. "
And she opened her eyes, and, seeing Peter, sat up.
41 And he gave her his hand and raised her to her feet; and he called the members of the church and the widows, and presented her alive.
42 And it became known throughout Joppa, and many believed on the Lord.
43 And it befell that he stayed at Joppa several days with one Simon, a tanner.
10:1-48
10 And a certain man at Cesarea, Cornelius by name, a centurion of what is known as the Italian cohort, 2 a pious man and one who feared God with all his family, doing many acts of charity to the people and praying to God continually, 3 saw in a vision distinctly, at about three o’clock in the afternoon, an angel of God come in to him and say to him "Cornelius! " 4 And he, terror-struck as he fixed his eyes on him, said "What is it, sir? "
And he said to him "Your prayers and charities have gone up for a memorial before God.
5 And now send men to Joppa after a certain Simon, who is also named Peter; 6 he is a guest of a certain Simon, a tanner, who has his house by the seaside. "
7 And when the angel that spoke to him went away, he called two of the domestics and a pious soldier, one of those who were constantly in his company, 8 and gave them an account of the whole event and sent them to Joppa.
9 And on the following day, as they were on their way and were nearing the city, Peter went up on the roof to pray at twelve o’clock.
10 And he grew hungry and wanted a bite; but while they were getting it ready he fell into a trance 11 and saw the sky opened and a thing like a great sheet coming down, being let down on the earth by four corners, 12 with all the different quadrupeds and reptiles and birds of the air in it.
13 And there came a voice speaking to him, "Up, Peter, kill and eat. " 14 And Peter said "No, no, sir, I have never eaten anything vile or unclean. " 15 And again there was a voice speaking to him a second time; "What God has made clean do not you make vile. " 16 And this happened three times, and at once the thing was taken up into the sky.
17 And as Peter was at a loss to know what the vision he had seen might be, the men sent from Cornelius made their appearance at the porch, having got themselves directed to Simon’s house, 18 and called out to inquire whether Simon, also named Peter, was a guest there.
19 And while Peter was thinking the vision over, the Spirit said "Here are men looking for you; 20 but rise and come down and go with them without any doubting, because it was I that sent them. " 21 And Peter came down to the men and said "Here, I am the one you are looking for: what is the occasion you are here about? " 22 And they said "Cornelius, a centurion, an upright and God-fearing man, vouched for by all the nation of the Jews, had it revealed to him by a holy angel that he should send for you to his house and hear words from you. "
23 So he invited them in and made them his guests.
But on the following day he went out with them, and some of the brothers from Joppa went with him.
24 And on the following day he came into Cesarea; and Cornelius was awaiting them, having called together his relatives and intimate friends.
25 And when it came to Peter’s going in, Cornelius met him and fell at his feet and did reverence.
26 But Peter made him rise, saying "Stand up: I am a man myself. " 27 And he went in conversing with him, and found a great many come together, 28 and said to them "You know yourselves it is an impropriety for a Jew to fraternize with an alien or make a call on him.
And God has shown me I am not to call any man vile or unclean; 29 for which very reason I came without making any objection when I was sent for.
So I inquire for what reason you sent for me. "
30 And Cornelius said "Four days ago, to an hour, I was offering the three o’clock prayer in my house, and there before me stood a man in splendid vesture 31 and said ‘Cornelius, your prayer is heard and your charities are remembered before God; 32 so send to Joppa and have Simon who is also named Peter come; he is a guest of Simon a tanner, by the seaside’; 33 so I sent to you instantly, and you did well to come.
So now we are all present before God to hear everything that you are directed to say by the Lord. "
34 And Peter opened his mouth and said "I perceive to a certainty that God is not partial, 35 but in every nation he who fears him and practices righteousness is acceptable to him.
36 The word he sent to the sons of Israel bringing the news of peace through Jesus Christ he is Lord of all 37 you know, the thing that took place all over Palestine, beginning from Galilee, after the baptism that John preached, 38 Jesus from Nazareth, how God anointed him with Holy Spirit and power; who went along doing good and healing all who were tyrannized over by the Devil, because God was with him 39 (and we are witnesses to everything that he did both in the countryside of the Jews and in Jerusalem); which same Jesus they put to death by hanging him on a tree.
40 Him God raised on the third day, and had him show himself, 41 not to all the people but to the witnesses preappointed by God, us who ate and drank with him after his rising from the dead, 42 and instructed us to proclaim to the people and to attest that this is the God-ordained judge of living and dead.
43 To him all the prophets testify that everyone who believes in him is to receive pardon of sins through his name. "
44 While Peter was still speaking these words the Holy Spirit fell upon all who were listening to the discourse; 45 and the circumcised believers who had come with Peter were surprised that the gift of the Holy Spirit was poured out on the foreigners too, 46 for they heard them speak languages and magnify God.
Then Peter answered 47 "Can anyone bar the water, that these who have received the Holy Spirit the same as we did should not be baptized? " 48 And he directed that they be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ.
Then they asked him to stay some days.
11:1-30
11 And the apostles, and the Palestinian brothers, heard that the foreigners too had received the word of God.
2 But when Peter came up to Jerusalem, the circumcised took issue with him, 3 saying "You went in where men with uncircumcised bodies were and ate with them. " 4 But Peter began and stated the case to them in detail, 5 "I was in the city of Joppa, praying, and in a trance I saw a vision, a thing coming down, like a great sheet being let down by four corners out of the sky, and it came clear down to me.
6 I fixed my eyes on it and looked, and saw the different quadrupeds, the wild beasts, the reptiles, the birds of the air.
7 And I also heard a voice say to me ‘Up, Peter, kill and eat.’ 8 And I said ‘No, no, sir, because a thing vile or unclean has never gone into my mouth.’ 9 And a second time a voice out of the sky answered ‘What God has made clean do not you make vile.’ 10 And this happened three times, and it was all of it drawn up into the sky again.
11 "And instantly three men made their appearance standing outside the house I was in, sent from Cesarea to me.
12 And the Spirit told me to go along with them without making any difference.
And these six brothers too went with me, and we went into the man’s house.
13 And he reported to us how he had seen the angel take its stand in his house and say ‘Send to Joppa for Simon, also named Peter, 14 who will speak words to you by which you and all your family shall be saved.’ 15 "And as I began to speak the Holy Spirit fell on them just the same as it had on us at first.
16 And I remembered the Lord’s word, how he said ‘John baptized with water, but you shall be baptized in Holy Spirit.’ 17 So if God gave them the same gift equally with us when they believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I to claim to veto God? "
18 At hearing this they let the matter drop, and glorified God, saying "Then God has given the foreigners too repentance into life. "
19 So those who dispersed at the distress that arose over Stephen went along as far as Phenicia and Cyprus and Antioch speaking the word to nobody but Jews alone; 20 but there were some of them, men from Cyprus and Cyrene, who, when they came to Antioch, spoke also to the Greek-speaking population, announcing the gospel of the Lord Jesus; 21 and the Lord’s hand was with them, and a great number that believed turned to the Lord.
22 And word about them came to the ears of the church at Jerusalem, and they sent Barnabas off to Antioch; 23 and when he arrived and saw the grace of God he was glad, and exhorted them all to stick to their hearts’ purpose in the Lord, 24 because he was a good man and full of Holy Spirit and of faith; and a considerable number joined the Lord.
25 And he went out to Tarsus to look up Saul, 26 and when he found him he brought him to Antioch.
And it came to pass that they met with the church through a whole year, and taught a considerable crowd; and that in Antioch the disciples first came to be styled Christians.
27 And meanwhile prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch; 28 and one of them, Agabus by name, stood up and gave an indication by the Spirit that there was to be a great famine all over the world of men; which there was in Claudius’s time.
29 And the converts, as one and another of them could afford, each set a sum apart to send for relief to the brothers that lived in Palestine; 30 and so they did, sending to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.
12:1-25
12 And at that time Herod the king lifted his hand to maltreat some of the representatives of the church.
2 And he put to death James the brother of John by the sword; 3 and, seeing that it was pleasing to the Jews, he went on to arrest Peter too (it was in the matzoth days), 4 and did capture him and put him in prison, committing him to four fours of soldiers to guard, meaning to bring him up to the people after the passover.
5 So Peter was being kept in the prison; but prayer was being ardently made to God for him by the church.
6 But when Herod was going to produce him, that night Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, chained with two chains, and guards in front of the door were watching the prison; 7 and lo, an angel of the Lord made his appearance, and a light shone in the room.
And he struck Peter on the side and waked him, saying, "Stand up quick "; and his chains dropped off from his hands.
8 And the angel said to him "Tie your belt and put on your sandals "; and he did so.
And he said to him "Put on your cloak and follow me "; 9 and he went out and followed him, and did not know that what was being done through the angel was real, but thought he was seeing a vision.
10 And they passed a first watch and a second and came to the iron gate that leads to the city, which opened to them of itself, and they went out and went one block, and at once the angel was gone from him.
11 And Peter, coming to himself, said "Now I know certainly that the Lord has sent out his angel and rescued me from Herod’s hands and all the expectation of the Jewish people. "
12 And when he realized the situation he came to the house of Mary the mother of John also named Mark, where a number had collected and were praying.
13 And when he knocked at the porch door a girl named Rhoda came to the door to answer the knock, 14 and, recognizing Peter’s voice, in her gladness she did not open the porch but ran in and reported that Peter was standing at the porch.
15 And they said to her "You are crazy "; but she insisted it was so; and they said "It is his angel. " 16 But Peter kept on knocking; and they opened and, to their surprise, saw him.
17 And he held up his hand to them for silence, and told them the story of how the Lord had brought him out of the prison, and said "Tell this to James and the brothers. "
And he went out and off to another place.
18 And when day came there was no little to-do among the soldiers to know what had become of Peter.
19 And Herod hunted for him, did not find him, examined the guards and ordered them executed, and went down from Judea to Cesarea and spent a while there.
20 And he was in a bitter quarrel with the Tyrians and Sidonians, and they had come to him unitedly and had got the influence of the king’s chamberlain Blastus and were asking for peace because their country depended on the king’s country for food, 21 and on a set day Herod had put on royal attire and taken his seat on the judgment-bench and was making a speech to them, 22 and the people were cheering and shouting "A god’s voice and not a man’s, " 23 and immediately an angel of the Lord struck him for his not having given God the glory, and he expired after he had come to being eaten up by maggots.
24 But the word of the Lord grew and gained ground.
25 And Barnabas and Saul, having completed the distribution of the relief at Jerusalem, returned, taking along with them John also named Mark.
13:1-52
13 And at Antioch, in the church that they had there, there were prophets and teachers, Barnabas and Symeon known as Niger and Lucius the Cyrenean, and Manahen a foster-brother of Herod the tetrarch, and Saul.
2 And while they were holding divine services and fasting, the Holy Spirit said "Set Barnabas and Saul apart for the work I have called them to. " 3 Then they fasted and prayed and laid their hands on them and sent them off.
4 So, with the Holy Spirit setting them on their way, they came down to Seleucia and sailed from there to Cyprus; 5 and when they got to Salamis they announced the word of God in the Jews’ synagogues.
And they also had John as their attendant.
6 And when they had come through the island clear to Paphos, they found a certain Jew magician and pretended prophet whose name was Bar-Jesu, 7 who was with the proconsul Sergius Paulus, a man of sense.
The latter sent for Barnabas and Saul and requested to hear the word of God; 8 but Elymas the conjuror (for this is the translation of his name) opposed them, trying to twist the proconsul away from the faith.
9 But Saul, also named Paul, filled with Holy Spirit, fixed his eyes on him 10 and said "O you man full of all trickery and unscrupulousness, son of the Devil, enemy of all honesty, will you never stop twisting the Lord’s straight paths? 11 now, lo, the Lord’s hand is on you, and you shall be blind, not seeing the sun, for a time. "
And immediately a mist and darkness fell upon him, and he went around looking for anybody to lead him by the hand.
12 Then the proconsul, seeing what had taken place, believed, being astonished over the teaching of the Lord.
13 And, sailing from Paphos, Paul and his company came to Perga in Pamphylia.
And John parted company with them and returned to Jerusalem; 14 but they, going through from Perga, arrived at the Pisidian Antioch, and went to the synagogue on the sabbath day and took seats.
15 And after the reading of the Law and the Prophets the directors of the synagogue sent word to them "Brethren, if you have in you any words of exhortation to the people, speak. "
16 And Paul stood up and beckoned for attention, and said "Men of Israel and you who fear God, listen.
17 The God of this people Israel chose our fathers, and raised the people high during its immigrant life in Egypt, and brought them out of it with a high arm, and, 18 when for a term of forty years he had borne with them in the wilderness, 19 demolished seven nations in Canaan and allotted their land to his people.
20 And for about four hundred and fifty years he gave judges down to Samuel the prophet.
21 And next they asked for a king; and God gave them Saul the son of Kish, a man out of the tribe of Benjamin, for forty years, 22 and, removing him, raised up David for their king, the same to whom he testified in the words ‘I have found David the son of Jesse, a man to my mind, who will do all my will.’
23 "From this man’s progeny, in accordance with promise, God has brought to Israel a Savior, Jesus, 24 when in advance of his advent John had proclaimed baptism for repentance to all the people of Israel.
25 And as John was rounding out his career he said ‘What do you suppose I am?
I am not the one, but here is coming after me he whose shoes I am not worthy to take off.’
26 "Brethren, sons of Abraham’s line and those of you who fear God, it is to us the words of this salvation are sent out.
27 For the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and its rulers, being ignorant of this and of the utterances of the prophets which are read every sabbath, fulfilled these in the judgment they passed, 28 and, not having found any grounds for putting him to death, asked Pilate that be might be executed.
29 And when they had accomplished everything that was written about him they took him down from the tree and laid him in a tomb.
30 But God raised him from the dead: 31 he appeared during a good many days to those who had gone up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are now his witnesses to the people.
32 "And we are bringing you word of the promise made to the fathers, 33 that God has fulfilled this to us their children in raising Jesus, as it is written in the first psalm ‘My son art thou, I myself have today given you birth.’ 34 And because he raised him up from the dead, never again to return to decay, he has said thus: ‘I will give you David’s faithful godly meed’ 35 because he also says in another psalm ‘Thou wilt not give thy godly one to see decay.’ 36 For David, after having in his generation served God’s will, went to rest and joined his fathers and saw decay; 37 but he whom God raised did not see decay.
38 "So be it known to you, brethren, that through him pardon of sins is announced to you, 39 and in him everyone who believes is justified from everything that you could not be justified from in Moses’s law.
40 So look out that what is said in the prophets does not come upon you, 41 ‘See, you despisers, and wonder, and fade away; for I am doing a deed in your days, a deed that you will not believe if one recounts it to you.’ "
42 And as they were going out they requested that they might have these words spoken to them for the ensuing sabbath; 43 and when the meeting broke up many of the Jews and of the religious-minded proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas, who spoke to them prompting them to keep in touch with God’s grace.
44 And on the following sabbath well-nigh all the city met to hear the word of the Lord.
45 But the Jews, seeing the crowds, were seized with jealousy and contradicted with blasphemies what Paul was saying.
46 And Paul and Barnabas spoke out squarely and said "It was necessary that the word of God must be spoken first to you; since you rebuff it and vote yourselves not worthy of the eternal life, here we turn to the foreign nations; 47 for so the Lord has commanded us, ‘I have set you for a light of nations, to have you be a salvation out to the remotest part of the earth.’ " 48 And the foreigners were glad to hear it and glorified the word of God, and as many as were candidates for eternal life believed; 49 and the word of the Lord was broadcasted throughout the region.
50 But the Jews egged on the respectable religious women and the leading men of the city and stirred up a persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and they put them out of their territory.
51 But they shook out the dust from their feet against them and came to Iconium; 52 and the converts were filled with joy and Holy Spirit.
14:1-28
14 And at Iconium in the same way they went into the Jews’ synagogue and so spoke that both of Jews and Greeks a great multitude believed.
2 But the disbelieving Jews stirred up and prejudiced the foreigners’ minds against the brothers.
3 So they spent a considerable time there speaking out on the Lord who attested his word of grace by giving tokens and wonders to be done through their agency.
4 But the populace of the city took sides, and some were with the Jews and some with the apostles.
5 And when there was a movement of both the heathens and the Jews, with their official heads, to mob them and stone them, 6 they, realizing the situation, took refuge in the cities of Lycaonia, Lystra and Derbe and the region around them, 7 and were preaching the gospel there.
8 And in Lystra there was sitting a certain cripple who had come lame out of his mother’s body and had never walked.
9 He was hearing Paul speaking; and he, fixing his eyes on him and seeing that he had faith to be made sound, 10 said in a loud voice "Stand up straight on your feet "; and he jumped and walked.
11 And the crowds, seeing what Paul did, raised their voices in Lycaonian, saying "The gods have taken the form of men and come down to us "; 12 and they called Barnabas "Jupiter, " and Paul "Mercury " since it was he who took the lead in speaking.
13 And the priest of the temple of Jupiter in front of the city brought bulls and garlands to the gates with the crowds and proposed to sacrifice.
14 But the apostles Barnabas and Paul, hearing of it, tore their clothes and sprang out among the crowd crying out 15 "Gentlemen, why are you doing this? we too are men with the same limitations as yourselves, who are bringing you word to turn about from these futilities to the living God who made the skies and the earth and the sea and everything in them; 16 who in the bygone generations allowed all the nations to go their own ways 17 and yet he did not leave himself unattested, doing good, giving you rains out of the sky and fruit-times, filling your hearts with food and cheeriness. " 18 And with saying this they barely succeeded in stopping the crowds from sacrificing to them.
19 But Jews from Antioch and Iconium came in and got the crowds on their side and stoned Paul and dragged him outside the city, supposing he was dead.
20 But while the converts encircled him he stood up and went into the city; and on the following day he went out to Derbe with Barnabas, 21 and after giving the gospel to that city and making a number of converts they returned to Lystra and Iconium and Antioch, 22 fortifying the converts’ souls, admonishing them to persist in faith and that it must be through many distresses that we come into the Reign of God.
23 And, after appointing elders for them city by city, they prayed with fastings and entrusted them to the Lord on whom they had believed, 24 and, passing through Pisidia, came to Pamphylia, 25 and spoke the word at Perga and came down to Attalia, 26 and from there sailed away to Antioch, the place from which they had been committed to God’s grace for the work they had achieved.
27 And, arriving there and bringing together the church, they reported what things God had done in connection with their work, and that he had opened a door of faith to the foreigners.
28 And they spent not a little time with the converts.
15:1-41
15 And certain persons came down from Judea and taught the brothers "If you are not circumcised by the Mosaic rite you cannot be saved. " 2 And when Paul and Barnabas had had not a little contradiction and argument with these, the brothers settled it that Paul and Barnabas and some others of them should go up to Jerusalem to the apostles and elders about this question.
3 So they, having been seen off by the church going with them out of the city, passed through Phenicia and Samaria recounting the turning of the foreigners, and caused great gladness to all the brothers.
4 And when they arrived in Jerusalem they were received by the church and the apostles and the elders, and reported what things God had done in connection with their work.
5 But some of the Pharisee party who had believed stood up and said it was necessary to circumcise them and instruct them to keep the law of Moses.
6 And the apostles and the elders met to see about this point.
7 And after there had been much argument Peter stood up and said to them "Brothers, you are aware that back in the earliest days God made among you the choice that it should be by my mouth that the foreigners should hear the word of the gospel and believe; 8 and the heart-discerning God vouched for them by giving the Holy Spirit the same as he did to us, 9 and made no difference between us and them, cleansing their hearts by faith.
10 So now why are you putting God on trial, in laying on the converts’ necks a yoke that neither our fathers nor we have been able to carry? 11 but we believe we are saved through the grace of the Lord Jesus in the same way as they. "
12 And the whole body became silent, and listened to Barnabas and Paul giving their account of what tokens and wonders God had done among the foreigners through them.
13 But after they had become silent James answered "Brothers, listen to me.
14 Symeon has given the account of how God first deigned to take out of the foreigners a people for his name.
15 And the words of the prophets are in harmony with this, as it is written 16 ‘After this I will turn back and rebuild David’s fallen booth, and rebuild its ruins and reerect it, 17 so that the remnant of men may seek the Lord, and all the nations that have been declared mine, says the Lord,’ making these things 18 known from of old. 19 Consequently I move that we do not interfere with those who from the nations are turning to God, 20 but send them a note to abstain from idol-contaminations and unchastity and blood.
21 For Moses has from the earliest generations had his preachers city by city, being read in the synagogues every sabbath. "
22 Then it was resolved by the apostles and the elders, with all the church, to choose and send to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas men out of their own number, Judas known as Barsabbas and Silas, leading men among the brothers, 23 writing by them "The apostles and the senior brothers to the brothers of foreign nationality in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia, greeting.
24 Since we have heard that some of us have disturbed you by unsettling your minds with things they said, to whom we had given no commission, 25 we have unanimously resolved to choose men and send them to you with our dear friends Barnabas and Paul, 26 men who have forgone their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
27 So we have sent Judas and Silas to make this same report themselves by word of mouth.
28 For it has been resolved by the Holy Spirit and by us not to impose on you any more of a burden than these essentials, 29 to abstain from things sacrificed to idols and from blood and from unchastity; from which things keeping clear, you will be doing well.
Our best wishes to you. "
30 So they were dismissed and came down to Antioch, and called a mass-meeting and handed over the letter; 31 and they read it and rejoiced at the encouragement, 32 and Judas and Silas, being prophets themselves, exhorted the brothers at length and fortified them; 33 and after spending some time they were courteously dismissed by the brothers to those who had sent them.
34 35 But Paul and Barnabas stayed on at Antioch teaching and circulating the word of the Lord, with many others besides.
36 And after some days Paul said to Barnabas "Let us go back and visit the brothers at each of the cities in which we announced the word of the Lord, to see how they are doing. " 37 And Barnabas wished to take along also John known as Mark, 38 but Paul claimed that the one who had deserted them in Pamphylia and not come to the work with them should not be taken along; 39 and such irritation ensued that they parted company, and Barnabas took Mark along and sailed for Cyprus.
40 But Paul picked out Silas and went out with the brothers commending him to the Lord’s grace.
41 And he passed through Syria and Cilicia fortifying the churches.
16:1-40
16 And in visiting the various places he reached Derbe and Lystra, and found that there was a convert there named Timothy, son of a Jewish woman who was a believer, but of a Greek father, 2 and that he was vouched for by the brothers at Lystra and Iconium.
3 Paul wanted this man to go out with him, and took him and circumcised him because of the Jews thereabouts, for they one and all knew he had a Greek for his father.
4 And as they went on through the cities they passed word to them to live up to the resolutions voted by the apostles and elders at Jerusalem.
5 So the churches grew solid in faith and plentiful in number day by day.
6 And they went through the Phrygian-Galatian country, being forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in the province of Asia, 7 and came up to Mysia and tried to take a course into Bithynia but the Spirit of Jesus would not allow them; 8 and they went past Mysia and down to Troas.
9 And in the night a vision appeared to Paul: some Macedonian man was standing and appealing to him and saying "Come over to Macedonia and help us. " 10 And when he had seen the vision, at once we made efforts to get out to Macedonia, inferring that God had invited us to bring the gospel to them.
11 So, setting sail from Troas, we made a straight run to Samothrace, and the following day to Neapolis, 12 and from there to Philippi, which is the first city in its quarter of Macedonia, a Roman colony.
And we were staying on in that city for some days; 13 and on the sabbath day we went outside the city by the river, where we understood there was a prayer-meeting, and sat down and talked to the women that came together.
14 And there was a certain woman named Lydia listening, a dealer in Turkey-red cloth from the city of Thyatira, a religious-minded person, whose heart the Lord opened to mark what Paul was saying.
15 And when she and her household had been baptized she invited us to stay with her, saying "If you have judged me to be a loyal believer in the Lord, come to my house and stay, " and would not take no for an answer.
16 And it befell that as we were on our way to the prayer-meeting we met with a certain slave-girl that had an oracular spirit, who did a great business for her owners as a clairvoyant.
17 She followed after Paul and us shouting "These men are servants of the highest god who announce to you a road to salvation. " 18 And this she did for many days.
But Paul, being nettled, turned round and said to the spirit "I enjoin you by the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her "; and out it came that very moment.
19 But her owners, seeing that their prospect of business was out, took Paul and Silas and dragged them to the marketplace where the magistrates were, 20 and brought them to the praetors and said "These men are agitating our city, when they are Jews, 21 and promulgating usages which we have not the right to accept or practice, being Romans "; 22 and the crowd struck in against them; and the praetors, tearing off their clothes, ordered them beaten, 23 and, after laying on many blows of the rods, threw them into prison, enjoining the jailer to keep them safely.
24 Receiving such a charge, he threw them into the inner prison and made their feet fast in the stocks.
25 But at midnight Paul and Silas in prayer were singing a hymn to God, and the prisoners were listening to them; 26 and suddenly there came a great earthquake so that the foundations of the lockup were shaken, and the doors all swung open, and everybody’s fetters were loosened.
27 And the jailer, coming awake and seeing the prison doors open, drew his sword and was going to take his own life, believing that the prisoners had escaped.
28 But Paul called out loudly "Don’t do yourself any harm, for we are every one here. " 29 And he asked for lights and sprang in, and, trembling all over, threw himself down before Paul and Silas 30 and took them outside in front and said "Sirs, what must I do to be saved? " 31 And they said "Believe on the Lord Jesus and you will be saved, you and your family "; 32 and they spoke the word of God to him with all who were in his house.
33 And he took them with him at that hour in the night and washed the blood off from the welts and was baptized immediately, he and everyone who belonged to him, 34 and brought them up to his house and set a table for them, and jubilated with all his family over having put his faith in God.
35 And when day came the praetors sent the lictors with the word "Let those men go. " 36 And the jailer reported the words to Paul: "The praetors have sent to let you go; so now go out and go on your way. " 37 But Paul said "They beat us publicly without a sentence and threw us into prison, when we were Roman nationals, and now they are turning us out privately!
I should say not! let them come themselves and fetch us out. " 38 And the lictors reported these words to the praetors; and they were afraid at hearing that they were Romans, 39 and came and apologized to them and fetched them out and requested them to go away from the city.
40 And they came out of the prison and went to Lydia’s, and saw the brothers and exhorted them, and went out.
17:1-34
17 And they went through Amphipolis and Apollonia without stopping and came to Thessalonica, where there was a synagogue of the Jews.
2 And, in accordance with Paul’s practice, he went in to them and for three sabbaths argued with them out of the scriptures, 3 elucidating and quoting that the Messiah must suffer and rise from the dead, and that "this Jesus whom I am announcing to you " is the Messiah.
4 And some of them believed it and associated themselves with Paul and Silas, and of the religious-minded Greeks a great number, and of the foremost women not a few.
5 But the Jews, growing jealous and enlisting some bad characters among the men about the marketplace and raising a mob, threw the city into an uproar and came in front of Jason’s house and proposed to bring them up before the people; 6 but, not finding them, they dragged Jason and some brothers off to the politarchs, clamoring "These who have driven wild the world of men have got here too; 7 Jason has taken them in; and all these are acting contrary to Caesar’s decrees by saying that there is another king, Jesus. " 8 And they alarmed the crowd and the politarchs with the hearing of this, 9 and they took security from Jason and the rest and dismissed them.
10 And the brothers at once sent Paul and Silas off in the night to Berea, where as soon as they arrived they went to the synagogue of the Jews.
11 And these were a better stock than those in Thessalonica, who received the word with the utmost eagerness, examining the Scriptures day by day as to whether these things were so.
12 So a great many of them believed, and of the respectable Greek women too, and of men, not a few.
13 But when the Jews from Thessalonica found out that the word of God had been announced by Paul at Berea too, they came even there, stirring up and alarming the crowds.
14 And then the brothers at once sent Paul out to get to the sea, while both Silas and Timothy stayed behind in the place.
15 And those who were escorting Paul took him on to Athens, and received an order to Silas and Timothy to come to him as soon as possible and went out.
16 And while Paul was waiting for them at Athens his spirit was provoked in him as he saw the city swarming with idols.
17 So he talked it over in the synagogue with the Jews and religious-minded people, and in the marketplace day after day with those who happened to be present.
18 And some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers encountered him, and some said "What is this phrasemonger trying to say? " and others "He seems to be a propagandist for foreign divinities, " because he was preaching the gospel of Jesus and Resurrection.
19 And they took him and brought him before the Areopagus, saying "May we know what this new teaching voiced by you is? 20 for you are bringing some surprising things to our ears, so we should like to know what it is all driving at. " 21 Now all the Athenians, and the foreigners who resided there, took every occasion to say or to hear something novel.
22 And Paul took his stand in the middle of the Areopagus and said "Men of Athens, every way I see you are great reverers of unseen powers.
23 For in passing along and observing the objects of your worship I found among the rest an altar inscribed "To Unknown God. "
So it is of what you adore unknowing that I am bringing you information.
24 God, who made the world and everything in it, does not, since he is Lord of heaven and earth, reside in man-made temples, 25 nor is tended by human hands for any want of his, when it is he who gave everybody life and breath and everything.
26 And he made out of one every nation of men to live all over the face of the earth, ordaining prescribed epochs and the limitations of their residence, 27 to have them seek for God if so be they might touch him in their groping and find him as indeed he is not far from each one of us,
28 Because in him we live and move and are, as some of your own poets too have said, For we his offspring are.
29 So, seeing we are God’s offspring, we ought not to think divinity is similar to gold or silver or stone sculptured by human art and conception.
30 "Therefore God, overlooking the times of ignorance, at present notifies men that everybody everywhere is to repent, 31 inasmuch as he has set a day on which he is going to judge the world of men with justice by a man whom he has designated and has certified to all by raising him from the dead; "
32 But at hearing of resurrection of the dead some jeered and others said "We will give you another hearing about this. " 33 With that Paul went out from their midst.
34 But some men adhered to him and believed, among them Dionysius an Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them.
18:1-28
18 After this he left Athens and came to Corinth; 2 and, finding a certain Jew named Aquila, a Pontus man by family, who had just come from Italy, he and his wife Priscilla, because Claudius had prescribed that all the Jews should leave Rome, he went to them, 3 and, because he was of the same trade, stayed with them and worked; for they were tentmakers by trade.
4 And he argued in the synagogue sabbath after sabbath and persuaded Jews and Greeks.
5 But when Silas and Timothy had come down from Macedonia Paul was under a pressure in his speaking, testifying to the Jews that Jesus was the Messiah.
6 But as they took a hostile attitude and blasphemed he shook out his clothes and said to them "Your blood be on your own heads; I am clean; from now on I will go to the foreigners "; 7 and he moved from there and came into the house of one Titius Justus, a religious-minded man, whose house was next door to the synagogue.
8 But Crispus the director of the synagogue believed the Lord with his whole family, and many of the Corinthians, hearing of it, believed and were baptized.
9 And the Lord said to Paul in the night by a vision "Do not be afraid, but speak and never be silent, 10 because I am with you and nobody shall fall foul of you to do you harm, because I have a numerous people in this city. " 11 And he kept on there a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them.
12 But when Gallio was proconsul of Achaea the Jews came down on Paul in a body and led him before the bench, 13 saying "This man is influencing people to adore God contrary to the law. " 14 But as Paul was about to open his mouth Gallio said to the Jews "Now, Jews, if it were an injustice or an unscrupulous meanness, I would bear with you as reason would require; 15 but if it is questions about language and names and your law, you will see to it yourselves: I do not care to be a judge of these things "; 16 and he drove them away from the bench.
17 And they all took hold of Sosthenes the director of the synagogue and thrashed him in front of the bench; and Gallio did not concern himself about any of this.
18 But Paul, after staying on with the brothers several days longer, bade them farewell and sailed for Syria, and with him Priscilla and Aquila, shearing his head at Cenchreae (for he had a vow).
19 And they reached Ephesus, and he left those two there; and he himself went into the synagogue and argued with the Jews, 20 but when they requested him to make a longer stay he would not consent, 21 but, bidding them farewell and saying "I will come back to you again, God willing, " set sail from Ephesus, 22 and, landing at Cesarea, went up and greeted the church and went down to Antioch; 23 and after spending some time there he went out going through the Phrygian-Galatian country, bracing up all the converts.
24 But a certain Jew named Apollos, an Alexandrian by family, an eloquent man, made his appearance in Ephesus, showing himself strong in the Scriptures.
25 This man had been indoctrinated in the Lord’s path, and, being enthusiastic, he was talking and teaching the particulars about Jesus while he knew only John’s baptism; 26 and this man began to speak out in the synagogue.
But Priscilla and Aquila, having heard him, took him home and stated God’s path to him more particularly.
27 And when he was desirous to go over to Achaea the brothers encouraged him to, and wrote to the converts to welcome him; and on his arrival he powerfully reinforced those who had believed through grace, 28 for he energetically argued the Jews down in public, showing by the Scriptures that Jesus was the Messiah.
19:1-41
19 And it befell while Apollos was at Corinth that Paul, having gone through the highland parts, came to Ephesus and found some converts, 2 and said to them "Did you receive Holy Spirit when you believed? " but they said to him "Why, we did not even hear of there being any Holy Spirit. " 3 And he said "Then what were you baptized into? " and they said "Into John’s baptism. " 4 And Paul said "John administered a baptism for repentance, telling the people that they were to believe in him who was coming after him, that is, in Jesus. " 5 And upon hearing it they had themselves baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus; 6 and upon Paul’s laying his hands on them the Holy Spirit came on them and they spoke languages and prophesied.
7 And there were in all about twelve men of them.
8 And he went into the synagogue and spoke out for three months, arguing and pressing home the truth about the Reign of God.
9 But when some hardened up and disbelieved, saying abusive things about the movement before the populace, he parted company with them and separated the converts, arguing day by day in Tyrannus’s school.
10 And this went on for two years, so that all the inhabitants of the province of Asia heard the word of the Lord, both Jews and Greeks.
11 And God did extraordinary miracles by Paul’s hands, 12 even to the extent that handkerchiefs or aprons from his body were carried to the sick and they were freed from their diseases and the evil spirits came out.
13 And some of the itinerant Jewish exorcists also undertook to name the name of the Lord Jesus over those who had the evil spirits, saying "I adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preaches. " 14 And there were seven sons of one Sceva, a Jewish chief priest, who did this; 15 but the evil spirit answered them "I know Jesus and I understand about Paul, but who are you? " 16 and the man with the evil spirit in him jumped at them and mastered them all and manhandled them so that they got away out of that house naked and wounded.
17 And this became known to all of both Jews and Greeks who lived in Ephesus, and fear fell upon them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus stood high, 18 and many of those who had believed came confessing and reporting their practices.
19 And several of those who had practiced supernatural methods brought their books together and burned them up in sight of everybody; and they added up the prices of them and found it made fifty thousand pieces of silver.
20 Thus with the Lord’s might the word grew and succeeded.
21 And when these things had run their course Paul made up his mind to go through Macedonia and Achaea to Jerusalem, saying "After I have been there I must see Rome too. " 22 And he sent to Macedonia two of his assistants, Timothy and Erastus, but himself waited a while in the province of Asia.
23 And at that time there came no little to-do about the movement.
24 For one Demetrius, a silversmith making silver Artemis-temples, furnished not a little business to the artists; 25 and, collecting these and the workmen in such lines, he said "Gentlemen, you know it is out of this business we have our prosperity; 26 and you see and hear that not only of Ephesus but of well-nigh all the province of Asia this Paul has persuaded a great lot of people to shift their ground with his talk that what are made by hands are not gods.
27 And there is danger not only that we shall have this department go out of demand but also that the temple of the great goddess Artemis will be thought nothing of, and that she will be brought down from her grandeur, she whom all Asia and the world of men adore. " 28 And, hearing this and getting into a rage, they went to screaming "Great is Artemis of the Ephesians! " 29 and the city was filled with the turmoil, and they rushed to the theater like one man, carrying off with them Gaius and Aristarchus, Macedonians who were traveling-companions of Paul.
30 And when Paul wished to go in before the people the converts would not allow him to; 31 and some of the Asiarchs too, being friendly to him, sent to him and appealed to him not to venture into the theater.
32 So some screamed one thing and some another, for the meeting was in a turmoil and the majority did not know on what account they had come together.
33 And out of the crowd they put up Alexander, the Jews making him their spokesman; and Alexander motioned with his hand and wanted to make a defense to the people.
34 But at recognizing that he was a Jew there came one voice from everybody, all screaming for about two hours "Great is Artemis of the Ephesians! great is Artemis of the Ephesians! "
35 But the city clerk quieted the crowd down and said "Why, men of Ephesus, who of all mankind is there that does not know the city of the Ephesians is temple-keeper of great Artemis and of what fell from Jupiter? 36 so, this being indisputable, it is our business to keep cool and not do anything rash.
37 For you have brought these men who have not been either stealing from the temple or blaspheming our goddess.
38 So if Demetrius and the artists who are with him have a case against anybody, the courts sit, and there are proconsuls; let them bring charges against each other.
39 But if you are after anything that goes farther, it shall be settled at the regular meeting 40 for we are in danger of being charged with revolutionism as to today’s, there being no cause, as to which we shall not be able to give an account as to this concourse. " 41 And with this he dismissed the meeting.
20:1-38
20 And after the disturbance had stopped Paul sent for the converts and exhorted them, and bade them farewell and went out to go to Macedonia.
2 And, having gone through those parts and given them much exhortation, he came to Greece 3 and spent three months, and, when a plot was laid against him by the Jews as he was going to embark for Syria, made up his mind to go back through Macedonia.
4 And there were accompanying him Sopater son of Pyrrhus, a Berean, and of the Thessalonians Aristarchus and Secundus, and Gaius a Derbean and Timothy, and out of the province of Asia Tychicus and Trophimus; 5 and these had come and were waiting for us at Troas.
6 And we sailed from Philippi after the Matzoth days, and came to them at Troas by five days, where we stayed on for seven days.
7 And on the first day of the week, when we had met to break bread, Paul was arguing with them, as he was going off next day, and ran on till midnight.
8 And there were several torches in the upper room where we had met; 9 and a certain young man named Eutychus, sitting in the window, being overcome with deep sleep as Paul kept on arguing, got so overcome by sleep that he fell from the third story clear down and was taken up dead.
10 But Paul went down and prostrated himself on him and embraced him and said "Do not get excited, there is life in him. " 11 And he went up and broke the bread and partook of it and conversed a good while till daybreak, and so went out.
12 And they brought the boy alive and were comforted not a little.
13 But we came to the ship and set sail for Assos, planning to take Paul up there; for so he had arranged, planning himself to come by land.
14 And when he rejoined us at Assos we took him up and came to Mitylene; 15 and we sailed from there on the following day and reached a point off Chios, and in another day we got over to Samos, and the next we came to Miletus; 16 for Paul had decided to sail past Ephesus so that he might not have occasion to lose time in the province of Asia; for he was making haste, if possible, to be at Jerusalem the day of Pentecost.
17 And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus and had the elders of the church come.
18 And when they came to him he said to them "You know yourselves, from the first day I set foot in the province of Asia, what I was like with you all the time, 19 serving the Lord with all humility and tears, and temptations that befell me by the plots of the Jews; 20 how I did not flinch from reporting to you and teaching you publicly and from house to house any of the things that might be well for you, 21 testifying both to Jews and to Greeks of repentance to God and faith in our Lord Jesus.
22 And now here I am on my way to Jerusalem fettered in spirit, not knowing the things I am to meet with 23 there except that the Holy Spirit is testifying to me in city after city saying that fetters and distresses await me.
24 But I do not value my life as of any account to me as compared with completing my run and the errand I had from the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of God’s grace.
25 And now here I know that you will not be seeing my face any longer, all you among whom I went back and forth preaching the Kingdom; 26 for which reason I want you to understand this day that I am clean of anybody’s blood, 27 for I did not flinch from reporting to you the whole of God’s plan.
28 Look out for yourselves and for all the flock in which the Holy Spirit has made you visitors to shepherd God’s church which he secured by his own blood.
29 I know that after I get there formidable wolves will invade you, not sparing the flock, 30 and out of your own ranks there will come up men talking perversities to draw the converts away after them; 31 for which reason keep awake, remembering that for three years I did not cease to admonish each one night and day with tears.
32 And now I commend you to God and to his word of grace, which is able to build up and to give heirship among all the sanctified.
33 Nobody’s silver or gold or clothing have I coveted; 34 you know yourselves that these hands attended to everything for my needs and for those I had with me.
35 I gave you the example that with such hard work we ought to assist the weakly, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, that he himself said ‘Happy is giving; it beats taking.’ "
36 And, having said this, he knelt down and prayed with them all.
37 And there was a good deal of weeping by everybody, and they threw themselves on Paul’s neck and kept kissing him, 38 pained most of all at the word he had spoken, that they were to see no more of his face.
And they accompanied him down to the ship.
21:1-40
21 And when we had torn ourselves away from them and set sail, we came in a straight run to Cos, and the following day to Rhodes, and from there to Patara; and, 2 finding a ship going across to Phenicia, we embarked and set sail in it.
3 And after sighting Cyprus and leaving it on the left we sailed on to Syria and landed at Tyre, for it was there that the ship was unloading her cargo.
4 And we hunted up the converts and stayed seven days there; which converts told Paul by the Spirit not to go on board for Jerusalem.
5 And when we had finished out the days we came out and went on our way, everybody going along to see us off, with their wives and children, till we got outside the city; and we knelt down on the beach and prayed 6 and bade each other farewell, and we went aboard the ship; and they returned to their own affairs.
7 And we, after making the passage by sea from Tyre, reached Ptolemais and greeted the brothers and stayed with them one day.
8 And the day after that we came out and came to Cesarea, and went to the home of Philip the evangelist, who was one of the seven, and stayed with him.
9 This man had four maiden daughters who used to prophesy.
10 And while we were making a stay of several days a certain prophet out of Jerusalem named Agabus came down, 11 and came to us and took off Paul’s belt and tied his own feet and hands and said "Says the Holy Spirit, the Jews will so tie up at Jerusalem the man this belt belongs to, and hand him over to the foreigners. " 12 And when we heard this, both we and the people of the place appealed to him not to go up to Jerusalem.
13 Then Paul answered "What are you doing weeping and tearing my heart? for I am ready not only to be put in fetters but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. " 14 And as he would not take the advice we dropped the matter, saying "The Lord’s will be done. "
15 And after those days we loaded up and went up to Jerusalem.
16 And with us came also some of the disciples from Cesarea, bringing the man at whose house we were to be entertained, one Mnason, a Cyprian, an original disciple.
17 And when we got to Jerusalem the brothers welcomed us with hearty pleasure.
18 And on the following day Paul went to James’s with us, and all the elders came in, 19 and he greeted them and gave accounts, one after another, of each of the things God had done among the foreigners by his agency.
20 And at hearing it they glorified God, and said to him "You see, brother, how many tens of thousands of those that have believed there are among the Jews, and they are all of them zealous for the law; 21 and they have had it dinned into their ears about you that you are teaching apostasy from Moses to all the Jews among the foreigners, saying they are not to circumcise their children nor go by the usages.
22 So what is the thing to do? they will be sure to hear you have come, 23 so do this that we tell you.
There are four men of ours who have vows of their own; 24 take these with you and be purified with them and pay the expenses for them so they may shave their heads, and everybody will know that there is nothing in the propaganda, but you too shape your course to keep the law.
25 But about the foreigners that have believed we sent a letter deciding that they were to keep clear of what has been sacrificed to idols, and blood, and strangled meat, and unchastity. "
26 Then Paul took the men with him and on the next day was purified and went into the temple-precinct with them, advertising the completion of the days of purification until the offering for each one of them was made.
27 But as the seven days were about to come to an end the Jews from the province of Asia, espying him in the temple-precinct, threw all the crowd into turmoil and laid hands on him, 28 screaming "Men of Israel, help! this is the man that is teaching everybody everywhere against the people and the law and this place; and what is more, he has brought Greeks into the temple-precinct and defiled this sacred place " 29 (for they had already seen in the city with him Trophimus the Ephesian, whom they supposed Paul had brought into the temple-precinct), 30 and all the city was stirred up, and the people flocked together, and they got hold of Paul and dragged him outside the temple-precinct, and the door was shut at once; 31 and as they were trying to kill him, information that Jerusalem was all in a turmoil came up to the tribune of the cohort, 32 who instantly took soldiers and centurions and ran down on them; and they, seeing the tribune and the soldiers, left off beating Paul.
33 Then the tribune came on and got hold of him and ordered him chained with two chains, and inquired who he was and what he had done; 34 and some in the crowd raised one cry and others something else.
And, not being able to find out the facts because of the disturbance, he ordered him brought into the barracks.
35 But when he came on the stairs he got to being carried along by the soldiers because of the violence of the crowd, 36 for the mass of the people were coming along screaming "Get him out of the way "; 37 and as he was about to be taken into the barracks Paul said to the tribune "Is it allowable for me to say something to you? "
And he said "You know Greek, do you? 38 then you are not the Egyptian that some time ago drove wild those four thousand men of the dagger gangs and led them out into the desert? " 39 But Paul said "I am a Jew, a man from Tarsus in Cilicia, a citizen of no insignificant city.
And I beg you, permit me to speak to the people. " 40 And, he having given permission, Paul, standing on the stairs, beckoned to the people.
And when he got a good deal of silence he called to them in the Hebrew dialect
22:1-30
22 "Brethren and fathers, listen to what I now say to you in my defense. " 2 And at hearing him call to them in the Hebrew dialect they grew quieter. And he said
3 "I am a Jew, born at Tarsus in Cilicia but brought up in this city, schooled at Gamaliel’s feet in the precise observance of our fathers’ law, originally a zealot for God such as you all of you are today, 4 who persecuted this movement to the death, putting both men and women in chains and committing them to prison, 5 as even the High Priest attests, and all the council of elders, from whom I also received letters to the brothers at Damascus and was on my way there to bring to Jerusalem in fetters to receive punishment those also who were there.
6 And it befell me as I was on my way and nearing Damascus that about noon, all of a sudden, a flood of light flashed round me out of the sky, 7 and I fell to the ground and heard a voice say to me ‘Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?’ 8 And I said ‘Who are you, sir?’ and he said to me ‘I am Jesus, the Nazarene Jesus whom you are persecuting.’ 9 And those who were with me saw the display of light but did not hear the voice of the one that spoke to me.
10 And I said ‘What shall I do, sir?’
And the Lord said to me ‘Stand up and go to Damascus, and there you will be told about everything that is set for you to do.’ 11 And when from the glory of that light I was not able to see, I came into Damascus led by the hand by those who were with me.
12 But one Hananiah, a man conscientiously faithful to the law, vouched for by all the resident Jews, 13 came to me and stood over me and said to me ‘Brother Saul, look up’; and that moment I looked up at him.
14 And he said ‘The God of our fathers has appointed you to know his will and to see the Righteous One and hear a voice from his mouth, 15 because you shall be to all men his witness of what you have seen and heard.
16 And now why do you put it off? stand up and be baptized and wash off your sins, invoking his name.’ 17 And when I was back in Jerusalem and was praying in the temple-precinct I had a trance 18 and saw him saying to me ‘Hurry out of Jerusalem right off, because they will not accept testimony of yours about me.’ 19 And I said ‘Lord, they know themselves I was imprisoning and beating in the different synagogues those who believed on thee; 20 and when the blood of thy witness Stephen was being shed I too was standing by and joined in approving it and guarded the cloaks of those who took his life.’ 21 And he said to me ‘Go, because I will send you far out to the foreigners.’ "
22 And they heard him up to that sentence, and raised their voices saying "Get a fellow like that off the earth, it is not right he should be alive. " 23 And as they were shouting and throwing off their cloaks and flinging dust into the air 24 the tribune ordered him taken into the barracks, telling them to have him examined with whips to ascertain the reason why they were making such an outcry against him.
25 But as they spread-eagled him for the lash Paul said to the posted centurion "Do you have the right to whip a Roman national without a sentence? " 26 And at hearing it the centurion came to the tribune and reported to him, saying "What are you proposing to do? this man is a Roman. " 27 And the tribune came to him and said to him "Say, are you a Roman? "
And he said "Yes. " 28 And the tribune answered "I got that citizenship for a good-sized sum. "
And Paul said "And I was born to it. " 29 So at once those who were going to examine him stood away from him. And the tribune too was afraid at realizing that it was a Roman and he had tied him up.
30 And on the next day, wishing to find out the facts as to what he was accused of by the Jews, he unfettered him, and gave the word for the chief priests and all the Sanhedrin to come together, and brought Paul down and set him before them.
23:1-35
23 And Paul, fixing his eyes on the Sanhedrin, said "Brethren, I have lived as God’s citizen with an all-around good conscience up to this day " 2 but Hananiah the high priest ordered those who stood beside him to give him a cuff on the mouth.
3 Then Paul said to him "God will cuff you, you whitewashed wall: are you both sitting to judge me under the law and breaking the law by ordering me cuffed? " 4 And those who stood beside him said "Abusing God’s high priest, are you? " 5 And Paul said "I did not know, brothers, that he was high priest; for it is written ‘To a ruler of your people you shall use no bad language.’ "
6 But, finding out that the one part was of Sadducees and the other of Pharisees, Paul cried out in the Sanhedrin "Brethren, I am a Pharisee, a son of Pharisees; it is about the hope and resurrection of the dead that I am on trial. " 7 And as he uttered this there arose an altercation of the Pharisees and the Sadducees, and the main body took sides.
8 For the Sadducees say there is no such thing as resurrection, nor angel nor spirit, but the Pharisees acknowledge all these.
9 And there was a great deal of shouting, and some of the scribes on the Pharisee side stood up and were fighting the case, saying "We find nothing wrong with this man; and if a spirit has spoken to him, or an angel " 10 And, as there was coming to be a great deal of altercation, the tribune was afraid Paul would be torn in pieces by them, and gave the word for the troops to come down and snatch him out of their midst and bring him into the barracks.
11 And in the following night the Lord stood over him and said "Courage, for as you testified about me at Jerusalem so you must bear witness at Rome too. " 12 But when day came the Jews got a party together and laid an imprecation on themselves, saying they would neither eat nor drink till they killed Paul.
13 And it was more than forty that made this conspiracy; 14 they came to the chief priests and the elders and said "We have bound ourselves by an imprecation not to taste anything till we kill Paul.
15 So now apply to the tribune, you with the Sanhedrin, to bring him down to you with the idea that you are going to determine the facts about him more precisely, and we are ready to dispatch him before he comes near. " 16 But Paul’s sister’s son, hearing of the ambush, came on and went into the barracks and reported it to Paul.
17 And Paul called one of the centurions to him and said "Take this young man to the tribune, for he has something to report to him. "
18 So he took him along and brought him to the tribune and said "Prisoner Paul called me to him and requested me to bring this young man to you, who has something to speak to you of. " 19 And the tribune, taking him by the hand and withdrawing with him to be by themselves, inquired "What is it you have to report to me? " 20 And he said "The Jews have agreed to request that tomorrow you would bring Paul down to the Sanhedrin with the idea of inquiring more precisely about him.
21 So don’t you take their word for it; for more than forty men out of them are in ambush for him, who have laid an imprecation on themselves not to eat nor drink till they take his life, and they are ready now, watching for the notification from you. "
22 So the tribune dismissed the young man with the injunction "Don’t let it out to anybody that you gave me this information "; 23 and he called to him a certain two of the centurions and said "Get two hundred soldiers ready to go through to Cesarea, and seventy horsemen and two hundred chasseurs, by nine o’clock at night, " 24 and told them to furnish beasts on which to mount Paul and bring him safe to Governor Felix, 25 and wrote a letter of which this was the gist: 26 "To his excellency Governor Felix.
Dear Sir: 27 This man having been seized by the Jews and being on the point of losing his life by them, I came on with the troops and rescued him, learning that he was a Roman, 28 and wishing to ascertain the offense with which they charged him I took him down to their Sanhedrin; 29 and I found him accused about questions of their law, but not having against him any charge to deserve death or imprisonment.
30 But, being notified that there would be a plot against the man, I instantly sent him to you, instructing the prosecutors also to say what they had to say of him before you. Respectfully, Claudius Lysias. "
31 So the soldiers, in accordance with their directions, took Paul up and brought him by night to Antipatris.
32 And next day they returned to the barracks, letting the horsemen go off with him; 33 and they, coming into Cesarea and delivering the letter to the governor, presented Paul also to him.
34 And he read it and put the question what province he was from, and, learning that it was Cilicia, 35 said "I will give you a hearing when your prosecutors too arrive, " ordering him kept in custody in Herod’s praetorium.
24:1-27
24 And after five days Hananiah the high priest came down with certain elders and one Tertullus, an orator, who all presented charges against Paul to the governor; 2 and, he being called, Tertullus began to open for the prosecution, saying "Since we are enjoying thorough peace through you and reforms are being brought about in this nation by your statesmanship, 3 we welcome it in every way everywhere, your excellency, with all thankfulness.
4 But, not to inconvenience you with anything lengthy, I appeal to your good nature to listen to us concisely.
5 For, having found this man a pest and a starter of revolutionary movements among all the Jews throughout the world of men and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes, 6 who even tried to desecrate the temple-precinct, and whom we seized, 7 8 from whom you can by examining him ascertain about all this that we accuse him of " 9 and the Jews too took part in the attack, asserting that those things were so.
10 And Paul, when the governor nodded to him to speak, answered "Knowing that you have for many years been judge of this nation, I speak on my own behalf with confidence, 11 as you can ascertain that it is not more than twelve days since I went up to Jerusalem to do reverence, 12 and they did not find me arguing with anybody or drawing a crowd either in the temple-precinct or in the synagogues or about the city, 13 nor can they substantiate to you what they are now accusing me of.
14 But this I acknowledge to you, it is in the way of the movement they call a sect that I am worshiping our fathers’ God, believing all that the law includes and all that is written in the prophets, 15 having a hope in God, what these are themselves watching for, that there is to be a resurrection of both saints and guilty men.
16 With a view to this I keep in training to have a clear conscience myself on God’s side and on man’s continually.
17 And after an interval of several years I came on to present gifts of charity to my nation, and offerings; 18 in connection with which they found me in the temple-precinct purified, not with a crowd nor with a disturbance; but some Jews from Asia 19 who ought to be appearing before you and prosecuting if they had anything to bring against me 20 or let these themselves say what wrong-doing they found when I stood before the Sanhedrin 21 but about this one cry that I shouted as I stood among them ‘It is about the resurrection of the dead I am on trial before you today.’ "
22 But Felix, knowing more precisely about the movement, postponed the case, saying "When Tribune Lysias comes down I will determine your affair " 23 and directing the centurion that he be in safekeeping and have things made easy for him, and not to interfere with any of his own set’s attending to his wants.
24 And after some days Felix came with his wife Drusilla, who was a Jewess, and sent for Paul and listened to him about faith in Christ Jesus.
25 But as he argued about honest living and self-restraint and the future judgment, Felix was terror-struck and answered "For now you may go, but when I get an opportunity I will send and have you come " hoping, 26 at the same time, that he would be given money by Paul, for which reason he quite often sent for him and had conversations with him.
27 But when two years had elapsed Felix received a successor, Porcius Festus; and, wishing to ingratiate himself with the Jews, he left Paul in prison.
25:1-27
25 So Festus, entering on his province, went up after three days from Cesarea to Jerusalem, 2 and the chief priests and the foremost of the Jews presented charges to him against Paul and appealed to him 3 to do them the favor of sending for him to Jerusalem; but they were laying an ambush to take his life on the way.
4 So Festus answered that Paul was being kept at Cesarea, and that he himself would soon be going out; "so, " said he, 5 "let those among you who are competent go down with me and prosecute the man if there is anything objectionable about him. " 6 And, after staying on among them not more than a week or ten days, he went down to Cesarea and on the next day took his seat on the bench and ordered Paul brought.
7 And when he was present the Jews that had come down from Jerusalem stood around him lodging many charges of grave offenses which they were not able to prove, 8 with Paul saying by way of defense "I have not committed any misdemeanor either against the Jews’ law or against the temple-precinct or against Caesar. "
9 But Festus, wishing to ingratiate himself with the Jews, answered Paul "Are you willing to go up to Jerusalem and be tried there before me on these charges? " 10 But Paul said "Standing before Caesar’s bench, I am standing where I have to be tried.
I have done the Jews no wrong, as you yourself know right well.
11 So if I am guilty and have done anything to deserve death, I do not ask to be let off from dying; but if there is nothing in the charges these men are prosecuting me on, nobody can dispose of me as a favor to them.
I appeal to Caesar. " 12 Then Festus, after conferring with his council, answered "You have appealed to Caesar; to Caesar you shall go. "
13 But after some days had passed Agrippa the king and Bernice arrived in Cesarea to greet Festus.
14 And while they were staying on there for several days Festus brought up with the king the matter about Paul, saying "There is a certain man who was left a prisoner by Felix, about whom, 15 when I was at Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews presented charges, asking for a condemnation against him; 16 to which I answered that the Romans are not in the habit of disposing of any man as a favor to anybody before the accused has had the accusers face to face and been given an opportunity to make a defense about the charge.
17 So when they came here with me I made no postponement, but on the following day took my seat on the bench and ordered the man brought; 18 and the accusers took their stand round him and brought no allegation of the criminal things I had been conjecturing, 19 but had certain questions at issue with him about their religious belief and about a certain Jesus who was dead, who Paul said was alive.
20 And, being quite at sea as to the discussion of these points, I said ‘would he like to go to Jerusalem and be tried there on these charges?’ 21 But when Paul appealed to be kept for his Majesty’s determination, I ordered him kept till I should send him up to Caesar. "
22 And Agrippa said to Festus "I should have liked to hear the man myself. "
"Tomorrow, " said he, "you shall hear him. " 23 So on the next day, when Agrippa and Bernice had come in great pomp and entered the auditorium with their chiliarchs and the prominent men of the city, and Festus gave the word, Paul was brought.
24 And Festus said "King Agrippa, and all you gentlemen we have with us here, you see this man about whom the entire body of Jews applied to me both at Jerusalem and here clamoring that he ought not to live any longer, 25 but I perceived that he had done nothing to deserve death, but when he himself appealed to his Majesty I decided to send him.
26 Now I do not have any solid facts to write to my master about him; for which reason I have brought him on before you all and especially before you, King Agrippa, in order that when the examination has been held I may have something to write; 27 for it seems to me unreasonable in sending a prisoner not to give also an indication of the charges against him. "
26:1-32
26 And Agrippa said to Paul "You are permitted to speak in your own behalf. "
Then Paul stretched out his hand and made his defense:
2 "As to all the accusations brought against me by the Jews, King Agrippa, I deem it a happy thing that I am to make my defense before you today, 3 you being a specialist in all the customs and points of debate among the Jews; for which reason I beg you to hear me patiently.
4 "My way of living from my youth up, what it has been from the first among my nation and in Jerusalem, all the Jews know, 5 having old acquaintance with me, if they are willing to testify, as having lived according to the most precise sect of our religion, a Pharisee.
6 And now I am standing trial for the hope of the promise made to our fathers by God, 7 to which our twelve tribes are hoping to attain by worshiping with ardor night and day; which hope, your majesty, is what the Jews’ charges against me are about.
8 Why is it pronounced incredible among you if God does raise dead men?
9 "Well, I had the idea that I ought to do much in opposition to the name of Jesus the Nazarene; 10 and I did, too, at Jerusalem, and many of the people of God I shut up in prisons, getting authority from the chief priests, and cast a vote against them when they were to lose their lives, 11 and over and over in the different synagogues I punished them and forced them to blaspheme, and in an utterly insane rage against them I pursued them clear to the foreign cities; 12 in connection with which business I was traveling to Damascus with the authority and leave of the chief priests when on my way 13 I saw at midday, your majesty, a light out of the sky shine round me and those who were traveling with me, above the brightness of the sun; 14 and as we all threw ourselves down on the ground I heard a voice say to me in the Hebrew dialect ‘Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me? it comes hard on you to lick against a goad.’ 15 And I said ‘Who are you, sir?’
And the Lord said ‘I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting; 16 but get up and stand on your feet, for it was for this I appeared to you, to appoint you agent and witness of how you have seen me and how I will appear to you, 17 rescuing you from the people and from the foreigners, to whom I am sending you 18 to open their eyes that they may turn from darkness to light and from Satan’s power to God, that they may receive pardon of sin and a lot among those who are sanctified by faith in me.’
19 "Whereat, your majesty, I was not disobedient to the bidding of the heavenly manifestation, 20 but notified first those in Damascus and Jerusalem, and throughout the country of Palestine, and the foreigners, to repent and turn about to God, doing deeds proper to repentance; 21 it was on this account that the Jews seized me in the temple-precinct and were trying to make away with me.
22 So, getting reinforcement from God, I stand to this day avouching to great and small, saying nothing outside of what the prophets and Moses spoke of as going to come to pass, 23 whether the Messiah is one to suffer, whether he is to be the first out of the resurrection of the dead to announce light to the people and to the foreigners "
24 And as he said these things in his defense Festus said loudly "You are insane, Paul; so much reading is bringing you to insanity. " 25 But Paul said "I am not insane, your excellency, but am uttering words of truth and sound sense.
26 For the king knows about these things; to him I speak without reserve, for I cannot believe any of these things are escaping his attention, for this is not a thing done in a corner.
27 King Agrippa, do you believe the prophets?
I know you believe. " 28 And Agrippa said to Paul "You are putting your propaganda in very small compass to make me a Christian. " 29 And Paul said "I would to God that both in things of small compass and of great not only you but also all who hear me today might become such as I myself am, aside from these fetters. "
30 And the king stood up, and the governor and Bernice and those who were sitting with them, 31 and when they withdrew they spoke to each other, saying "This man is doing nothing to deserve death or fetters. " 32 And Agrippa said to Festus "This man could be going free if he had not appealed to Caesar. "
27:1-44
27 And when it was decided that we should sail to Italy, they were committing Paul and some other prisoners to a centurion named Julius of the Augustan cohort, 2 and we embarked in a Hadramyttene ship that was going to sail for the places along by the province of Asia, having with us Aristarchus, a Macedonian from Thessalonica; 3 and on the following day we put into Sidon, and Julius treated Paul humanely and permitted him to go to his friends and enjoy their care.
4 And when we had set sail from there we sailed under the lee of Cyprus because of the winds’ being against us, 5 and after sailing over the high seas off Cilicia and Pamphylia for a fortnight we came to land at Myra in Lycia; 6 and there the centurion, finding a ship from Alexandria on its way to Italy, embarked us in it.
7 And during several days we had slow sailing and barely succeeded in getting opposite Cnidus, the wind not letting us through; and we sailed under Crete by Salmone, 8 and barely succeeded in coasting along it and coming to a certain place called Fair Havens, near which was a city Lasea.
9 And when considerable time had elapsed and the sailing was now risky because even the fast was now gone by, Paul gave his advice, 10 saying to them "Gentlemen, I can see that the voyage will be with damage and great loss not only of the cargo and the ship but also of our persons. " 11 But the centurion put more faith in the skipper and the contractor than in what Paul said; 12 and, the harbor being inconvenient for wintering, the majority voted to put out from there and see if they could not reach Ph[o]enix, a harbor of Crete facing westward, and winter there.
13 And when a gentle southerly breeze sprang up they thought they had secured their intent, and weighed anchor and ran along hugging the coast of Crete.
14 But after no great time a hurricane beat down from it, what is called an east-northeaster; 15 and, the ship being caught and carried along and not able to come head to the wind, we gave in and drove along.
16 And, running under the lee of a certain islet named Clauda, we managed with difficulty to get possession of the boat, 17 and when they got it in they took strengthening measures, fastening ropes around the hull, and, fearing that they would run on the Syrtis, let down the rigging and so drove along.
18 And on the following day, as we were making very heavy weather, they threw over cargo, 19 and on the third day they threw away the ship’s furnishings with their own hands; 20 and when for several days neither sun nor stars were visible, and we had no small amount of storm pressing us, the upshot was that all hope of our being saved disappeared.
21 And, as not much food was being taken, Paul then stood out in their midst and said "Gentlemen, you ought to have done as I told you and not put out from Crete, and saved this damage and loss.
22 And at present I advise you to be cheery; for there will be no loss of a life among you, only of the ship.
23 For there came and stood by me this night a messenger of the God to whom I belong, in whose service also I am engaged, 24 saying ‘Do not be afraid, Paul: you must stand before Caesar; and here God has granted you all who are sailing with you.’ 25 Wherefore, gentlemen, be cheery; for I believe my God that it will be so as I have been told.
26 But we have to run on some island or other. "
27 And when it came to the fourteenth night of our driving about in the Adriatic, in the middle of the night the sailors surmised they were coming toward some piece of ground, 28 and they heaved the lead and found twenty fathoms.
And they waited a bit and heaved the lead again and found fifteen fathoms; 29 and, fearing they might run on rough ground, they let go four anchors from the stern and prayed for day to come.
30 And as the sailors were trying to desert the ship and had let down the boat into the sea under pretense of being going to carry out anchors from the bow, 31 Paul said to the centurion and the soldiers "If these do not stay in the ship you cannot be saved. " 32 Then the soldiers cut away the ropes of the boat and let it drop off.
33 And until day should come Paul invited one and all to take food, saying "Today is the fourteenth day you have been waiting to see what would come and going without meals, not taking a bite.
34 Such being the case, let me invite you to take food, for that will be on the side of safety; for not a hair will be lost from the head of any of you. " 35 And with that, taking a biscuit, he gave thanks to God before them all and broke it and began to eat; 36 and they all cheered up and took some food themselves.
37 (And there were two hundred and seventy-six souls of us in all on board.) 38 And when they had eaten all they wanted they went to lightening the ship by throwing out the provisions into the sea.
39 And when day came they did not recognize the land, but they espied a sort of bay with a beach, on which they planned to run the ship up if they could; 40 and they slipped the anchors and left them in the sea, at the same time loosening the couplings of the steering-oars and hoisting the foresail to the blast, and headed for the beach.
41 But they struck a place where the sea came from two sides, and there they ran the ship aground; and the bow stuck fast and remained immovable, but the stern was breaking up with the battering.
42 And on the part of the soldiers there was a plan to kill the prisoners for fear someone should swim out and make his escape; 43 but the centurion, wishing to bring Paul safe through, stopped them from carrying out their intent, and gave the word that those who could swim should throw themselves off first and get out to land, 44 and the rest some on boards and some on some of the things from the ship.
And so it came about that all got safe to land.
28:1-31
28 And when we were safe ashore, then we ascertained that the island was called Malta.
2 And the natives treated us with uncommon kindliness, for they lighted a bonfire and freshened us all up because of the rain that was falling and because of the cold.
3 And when Paul had got together a quantity of small wood and laid it on the fire, a viper came out, getting away from the heat, and fastened on his hand.
4 And when the natives saw the creature hanging to his hand they said to each other "Decidedly this man is a murderer who has come safe in from the sea but whom Justice would not let live. " 5 So he shook the creature off into the fire and suffered no harm, 6 but they were expecting he was going to swell up or suddenly drop dead; but when they had been expecting a good while and saw that nothing out of the way was happening to him, they changed about and said he was a god.
7 And in the environs of that place there were properties belonging to the headman of the island, a man named Publius, who took us in and gave us cordial hospitality for three days.
8 And it befell that Publius’s father was sick abed suffering with fever and dysentery; and Paul went in to him and prayed and laid his hands on him and healed him.
9 And after this event the rest of those on the island who had sicknesses came and were cured, 10 and they both paid many honors to us and loaded us up with supplies when we were setting sail.
11 And after three months we set sail in a ship that had wintered at the island, the "Castor and Pollux " of Alexandria, 12 and we put into Syracuse and made a stay of three days, 13 and from there we went round about and reached Rhegium, and, as after one day a south wind came up, on the second day we came to Puteoli, 14 where we found brothers and accepted an invitation to stay with them seven days; and so we came to Rome, 15 and from there the brothers, having heard about us, came as far as Appii Forum and Tres Tabernae to meet us.
And at seeing them Paul thanked God and took courage.
16 And when we came into Rome, Paul was permitted to stay by himself with the soldier that guarded him.
17 And after three days he called together those who were leaders of the Jews; and when they came together he said to them "Brethren, without my having done anything against the people or our fathers’ usages I was given over from Jerusalem as a prisoner into the hands of the Romans, who, 18 upon examining me, wanted to release me because of there not being in the case any grounds for putting me to death; 19 but when the Jews spoke against it I was compelled to appeal to Caesar; not as having any accusation to make against my nation.
20 So on these grounds I applied to see you and talk to you; for it is on account of the hope of Israel I am wearing this chain. "
21 And they said to him "We have neither received letters about you from Jerusalem nor has anyone of the brothers arrived and reported or talked anything bad about you.
22 But we want to hear from you what your ideas are; for as to this doctrine it is well known to us that there is talk against it everywhere. " 23 And they made an appointment with him and a number of them came to him at his lodging, to whom he stated the case, testifying to the Reign of God and making his points about Jesus to them out of the law of Moses and out of the prophets, from morning till evening; 24 and some believed what was told them, and some disbelieved.
25 And, being unable to agree with each other, they broke up, Paul saying one word, "Well did the Holy Spirit tell your fathers through the prophet Isaiah 26 ‘Go to this people and say "Hear you shall, and not understand; and see you shall, and not perceive; 27 for this people’s wits are thickened, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have shut, for fear they should see with their eyes and hear with their ears and understand with their wits, and turn back, and I should heal them. "’ 28 So be it known to you that this salvation of God’s is sent to the foreigners; they will listen, too. "
29 30 And he stayed in a tenement of his own a whole two years, and made welcome all who went in to him, 31 proclaiming the Reign of God and teaching about the Lord Jesus Christ with the utmost outspokenness, without being interfered with.
Romans
1:1-32
1 Paul, a servant of Christ Jesus, a chosen apostle set apart for God’s gospel 2 which he had previously promised in holy scripture through his prophets, 3 about his Son, who came of David’s stock in the way of flesh 4 and who was betokened God’s son in power in the way of spirit of holiness by resurrection of the dead, Jesus Christ our Lord, 5 through whom we received grace and a mission on behalf of his name to bring about obedience of faith among all the nations, 6 among whom are you too, Jesus Christ’s called men, 7 to all who are at Rome, dear to God, holy men called: grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
8 First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all because your faith is reported all over the world.
9 For God, to whom I perform service in my spirit in carrying the gospel of his Son, is my witness how I uninterruptedly make mention of you at all times in my prayers, 10 petitioning in the hope that at long last I may by God’s will have a chance to come to you; 11 for I am longing to see you in order that I may pass on to you a share in some spiritual gift with a view to your being fortified 12 that is, to enjoying mutual encouragement among you through each other’s faith, yours and mine.
13 And I do not want you to be without the knowledge, brothers, that several times I intended to come to you and hitherto was prevented; I wanted to have some fruit in you too, as I had in the rest of the nations.
14 I owe a duty both to Greeks and to barbarians, both to wise men and to stupid men; 15 thus I on my part am heartily ready to preach the gospel to you at Rome too.
16 For I am not ashamed of the gospel; for it is a power of God’s for salvation to everybody who believes, Jew first, Greek too; 17 for a righteousness of God’s is revealed in it, coming out of faith, leading into faith, as it is written "But the righteous man shall have life out of faith. "
18 For God’s anger is revealed from heaven against every impiety and crime of men, who keep the truth down by crime, 19 because knowledge of God is manifest in them, for God manifested it to them; 20 for since the creation of the world what is invisible of him has been under observation, sensed by what he has made, his eternal power and his divinity, so as to make them inexcusable 21 because when they knew God they did not glorify or thank him as God but ran into fatuity in their conceptions, and their unintelligent heart was darkened.
22 While professing to be wise they grew foolish, 23 and changed the glory of the imperishable God for the likeness of an image of perishable man and of birds and quadrupeds and reptiles.
24 Wherefore God gave them up in their hearts’ desires to the uncleanness of having their bodies dishonored while they wear them, 25 whereas they exchanged God’s truth for falsehood and revered and worshiped the creature rather than the Creator who is blessed forever; amen! 26 That was why God gave them up to dishonorable passions; for the females of them changed the natural intercourse for the unnatural, 27 and so did the males too, leaving off the natural intercourse with the female, get inflamed with appetite for each other, males committing indecency with males and receiving in themselves the requital that they ought to for their misguided course.
28 And as they did not think well of recognizing God, God gave them up to a mind that cannot be thought well of, to do what ought not to be done, 29 crammed with all injustice, villainy, greed, viciousness, full of envy, murder, quarreling, fraud, malice; whisperers, 30 detractors, God-haters, bullies, proud, pretentious, inventors of vices, disobedient to parents, 31 senseless, faithless, loveless, pitiless 32 who, aware of God’s verdict that those who commit such things deserve death, not only do the things but even approve of doing them.
2:1-29
2 Wherefore you are inexcusable, man, any man that passes judgment; for in the judgment you pass on the other man you are condemning yourself, for you who pass it are committing the same things.
2 And we know that God’s judgment is truthfully against those who commit such things.
3 And do you count on this, man passing judgment on those who commit such things and doing them, that you will escape God’s judgment? 4 or do you despise his wealth of kindness and tolerance and patience, ignorant of the fact that God’s kindness is leading you toward repentance, 5 but with your stiffness and unrepenting heart store up for yourself anger on the day of God’s anger and revelation of just judgment? 6 who will repay each man according to his deeds: 7 those who seek for glory and honor and immortality by way of steadfastness in good work, with eternal life; 8 but those who act by self-interest and disobey the truth, but obey wrong, with anger and wrath; 9 distress and anguish upon every soul of evil-doing man, Jew first and Greek too, 10 but glory and honor and peace for everyone who does what is good, Jew first and Greek too, 11 for there is no favoritism with God.
12 For as many as sinned without law will perish without law, and as many as sinned under the law will be judged by the law; 13 for it is not the audience of the law that are righteous with God, but it is the doers of the law that are justified.
14 For when heathens who do not have the law do by nature what the law commands, these, not having the law, are a law for themselves, 15 displaying as they do the work of the law in writing on their hearts, their own consciences joining in the testimony and their mutual thoughts bringing accusations or, as the case may be, defenses, 16 on the day in which God is going to judge what is covered up in men, in accordance with my gospel, through Christ Jesus.
17 But if you wear the name of Jew, and rest on the law, and boast of God, 18 and know his will and are a judge of the things he cares about, being schooled out of the law, 19 and feel assured that you are a guide for blind men, a light for those who are in the dark, 20 a preceptor for silly men, a teacher for infants, having in the law the formulation of knowledge and truth, 21 then do you who are teaching somebody else not teach yourself? do you who preach not to steal steal? 22 do you who tell them not to commit adultery commit adultery? do you who abominate idols rob temples? 23 do you who boast of the law dishonor God by violation of the law? 24 for God’s name gets vilified among the nations because of you, as is written.
25 For circumcision is worth while if you live up to the law; but if you are a violator of the law your circumcision is turned to uncircumcision.
26 So if uncircumcision keeps the prescriptions of the law, will not his uncircumcision be counted as circumcision, 27 and natural uncircumcision, fulfilling the law, pass judgment on you who with letter and circumcision are a violator of the law? 28 For it is not the one who is visibly such that is a Jew, nor is it the visible, in the flesh, that is circumcision, 29 but the Jew who is such in what is out of sight, and heart-circumcision in spirit, not in a literal sense; of which the praise comes not from men but from God.
3:1-31
3 Then what is the Jew’s special privilege, or what is the good of circumcision? 2 Much every way.
For, in the first place, that they had God’s revelation entrusted to them 3 for what if some were faithless? is their faithlessness to abrogate God’s faith? 4 away with the thought, but let God prove true, and every man a liar! as it is written, "so that thou mayest be found to have been in the right in thy words, and mayest win when thou comest into court. "
5 But if our wrongness brings out God’s righteousness, what, shall we say? is God doing a wrong when he comes down with anger?
I speak from a human point of view.
6 Away with the thought, for how is God to judge the world? 7 But if by my lie God’s truth came out the more abundant to his glory, why am even I any longer judged as a sinner, 8 and not as the gibe against us goes, and as some do assert that we say, "Let us do the bad things so that we may have the good consequences, " on whom judgment is well-deserved.
9 What follows then? are we outranked? no, decidedly.
For we previously indicted both Jews and Greeks as being all under sin, 10 as it is written "There is not one single right-doer, 11 none that understands, none that seeks God; 12 all have gone wrong, together they are good for nothing; there is none that is acting humanely, not even one "; 13 "their throat is an open grave, they have used their tongues insidiously, " "there is cobras’ venom under their lips, " 14 "whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, " 15 "their feet are swift to shed blood, 16 havoc and wretchedness are along their roads, 17 and they have not known the road to peace, " 18 "there is no fear of God before their eyes. " 19 And we know that in anything that the law says it is speaking to those who are within the law’s jurisdiction, in order that every mouth may be stopped and all the world become liable to judgment by God, 20 because out of deeds under the law no mortal will be justified before him.
For through the law comes recognition of sin.
21 But now apart from the law a righteousness of God’s has been disclosed, attested by the law and the prophets, 22 but a righteousness of God’s through faith in Jesus Christ to reach all who believe; for there is no distinction, 23 for all have sinned and come short of God’s glory, 24 getting their justification gratuitously by his grace through the redemption by Christ Jesus, 25 whom God put forward to be propitiatory through faith by his blood for a display of his righteousness, because of the way in which under God’s forbearance previous sins had been let pass; 26 with a view to the displaying of his righteousness at the present time, so that he should be righteous and be justifying the one who lives by faith in Jesus.
27 So what becomes of boasting? it is shut off.
By what law? of deeds? no, but by the law of faith, 28 for we count that a man is justified by faith apart from deeds under the law.
29 Or is God the God of the Jews only? is he not of the nations too?
Yes, of the nations too, 30 if it be true that God is one, who will justify circumcised men on the basis of faith and uncircumcised by means of faith.
31 Are we superseding the law by faith, then? away with the thought, we are making good the law.
Romans
4:1-25
4 Then what shall we say that Abraham, our forefather in the way of flesh, had found? 2 For if Abraham was justified as the outcome of deeds, he does have something to boast of.
But not to God, 3 for what does the text say?
"And Abraham believed God, and it was counted righteousness for him. " 4 But one who works does not have the pay counted to him in the way of grace but of debt; 5 but one who does not work but puts faith in him who justifies an impious man has his faith counted for righteousness, 6 in the same way as David tells of the happy state of the man to whom God counts righteousness apart from works: 7 "Happy they whose wickednesses are forgiven and whose sins are covered up; 8 happy a man for whom the Lord does not count sin. " 9 Is this happy state, then, pronounced upon circumcision, or upon uncircumcision too? for we are saying "Faith was counted righteousness for Abraham. " 10 How was it counted then, when he was in circumcision or in uncircumcision?
Not in circumcision but in uncircumcision; 11 and he got the token of circumcision as a seal of his righteousness of faith in uncircumcision, so that he should be father of all who believe while uncircumcised so that righteousness should be counted to them, 12 and father of circumcision for those who are not of circumcision only but who also walk in the tracks of the faith our father Abraham had during uncircumcision.
13 For it is not through the law that there is the promise to Abraham or to his descendants, that he is to be heir of the world, but through righteousness of faith.
14 For if those who are on the basis of law are heirs, faith is nullified and the promise is superseded; 15 for the law evolves anger, and where there is not law there is not violation either.
16 Hence, on the basis of faith in order to be in the way of grace, so that the promise may be securely settled to all the descendants, not only the line which is based on the law but also that which is based on Abraham’s faith, his who is father of all of us 17 (as it is written "I have made you father of many nations ") before the God whom he believed, him who brings the dead to life and calls what does not exist as though it did; 18 his who in a hopeless case had the hopefulness to believe, so as to become father of many nations in accordance with what it says, "Such shall your descendants be, " 19 and did not weaken in faith as he observed his own body gone dead, he being a hundred years or so old, and the deadening of Sarah’s womb; 20 but he did not unbelievingly doubt at God’s promise, but had his faith invigorated, giving glory to God 21 and feeling convinced that what he has promised he is able to go on and do; 22 which is why it was counted for righteousness to him.
23 And it was not written on his account only that it was counted to him, 24 but on ours too, to whom it is going to be counted, us who believe on the one that raised from the dead our Lord Jesus, 25 who was handed over to death on account of our offenses and was raised on account of our justification.
5:1-21
5 So, being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 by whose agency we have also had the introduction into this grace in which we stand, and boast of the hope of God’s glory.
3 And not only this, but we also boast of our distresses, knowing that distress develops endurance; 4 and endurance, positive experience; and positive experience, hope; 5 and hope does not put us to shame, because God’s love has been poured out in our hearts through the Holy Spirit that was given to us.
6 For while we still were weak Christ died for impious men in time of need.
7 For one will scarcely die for a saint for a good man maybe someone does even venture to die 8 but God vouches for his own love to us in that while we were still sinful Christ died for us; much more, 9 then, now that we have been justified by his blood we shall be saved from God’s anger through him.
10 For if when enemies we were reconciled to God by his Son’s death, much more when reconciled shall we be saved in his life; 11 and not only saved but also boasting of Cod through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we did now receive the reconciliation.
12 For this reason, just as it was through one man that sin came into the world, and, through sin, death, and thus death went on to all men inasmuch as all sinned 13 for until the law there was sin in the world, but sin is not charged in the account when there is no law, 14 yet death reigned from Adam to Moses even over those who had not sinned in a way parallel to the violation by Adam, who is a type of the one that was to be.
15 But the act of grace is not just as the offense was.
For if by the one man’s offense the many died, much more did God’s grace and the gift in grace, the grace of the one man Jesus Christ, come amply to the many. 16 And what is given is not as in the case of the one’s sinning; for the judgment followed from one to condemnation, but the act of grace from many offenses to justification.
17 For if by the one’s offense death reigned through the one, much more shall those who receive the amplitude of grace and of the gift of righteousness reign in life through the one, Jesus Christ.
18 So then as through one offense the consequence followed to all men to condemnation, so too through one deed of right it follows to all men to justification into life; 19 for as the many were rendered sinful through the one man’s failure to obey, so too the many will be rendered righteous through the one’s obedience.
20 And the law stepped in to play its part so that there should be plenty of the offense; but where there was plenty of sin there was superabundance of grace, 21 in order that as sin did reign in death, so too grace might reign through righteousness to eternal life through our Lord Jesus Christ.
6:1-23
6 What shall we therefore say? "let us keep on with sin so that there may be plenty of grace "? 2 away with the thought!
We who died to sin, how are we to live in it still? 3 Or are you unaware that we, whoever were baptized into Christ Jesus, were baptized into his death? 4 so we were buried together with him through baptism into death, in order that as Christ was raised from the dead through the Father’s glory, so we too should walk on the new footing of life.
5 For if we have come to be twinned with the likeness of his death, yet so shall we of his resurrection; 6 knowing this, that the old man of us was crucified with him in order that sin’s body might be discontinued so that we should no longer belong to sin; 7 for he who has died is acquitted of sin.
8 And if we died with Christ we believe that we shall also live with him, 9 knowing that Christ risen from the dead does not die anymore; death no longer has jurisdiction over him; 10 because his dying he did to sin, once for all, but his living he is doing to God.
11 So you too: count it that you are dead to sin but alive to God in Christ Jesus.
12 So let sin not reign in your mortal body to have you obey its desires, 13 and do not present your organs to be sin’s instruments for wrong-doing, but present yourselves to God like men alive from the dead and your organs to be God’s instruments for right-doing.
14 For sin is not to have jurisdiction over you; for you are not under the law but under grace.
15 What then? are we to sin because we are not under the law but under grace? away with the thought! 16 Do you not know that to whom you present yourselves as his for obedience, his you are, his whom you obey? either sin’s, for death, or obedience’s, for righteousness.
17 But thanks be to God that you were slaves to sin but obeyed with goodwill the pattern of teaching under which you were put, 18 and, set free from sin, were enslaved to righteousness 19 I use human language in view of the weakness of your flesh; for, as you did present your organs in servitude to uncleanness and wickedness for wickedness, so now present your organs in servitude to righteousness for sanctification.
20 For when you were in servitude to sin you were free as regards righteousness; 21 so what fruit did you have then? things you are now ashamed of.
For the end of those things is death; 22 but now, set free from sin but enslaved to God, you have your fruit for sanctification, and the end eternal life.
23 For sin’s pay is death, but God’s gracious gift is eternal life in our Lord Christ Jesus.
7:1-25
7 Or are you unaware, brothers (for I am speaking to men who know the law), that the law has jurisdiction over man so long as he is alive? 2 For the wedded woman is bound to the living husband by the law; but if the husband dies she is disengaged from the husband’s law.
3 So while the husband is alive she will be called an adulteress if another man gets her; but if the husband dies she is free from the law so as not to be an adulteress when another man does get her.
4 Hence, my brothers, you too were brought into death to the law through the Christ’s body so that another might get you, he who rose from the dead, in order that we may bear fruit for God.
5 For when we were in the flesh the susceptibilities to sin that come by the law were at work in our organism so that we should bear fruit for death, 6 but now we have been disengaged, having died, from the law in which we were held under, so that we serve in the new relation of spirit and not in the old relation of letter.
7 What shall we therefore say? "the law is sin "? away with the thought! but I should not have known sin except through the law.
For I should not know about coveting if the law did not say "You shall not covet. " 8 But sin, getting a start by the commandment, produced in me a coveting of everything.
For without the law sin is dead; 9 and I was alive without the law once.
But when the commandment came sin came to life, and I died; 10 and for me the commandment, the very thing that led to life, was found to lead to death, 11 since sin, getting a start by the commandment, tricked me, and killed me through it.
12 Consequently: the law is holy, and the commandment holy and just and good.
13 Then did the good become death for me? away with the thought, but sin did, in order that it might appear as sin, producing death for me through the good, in order that sin might come out supremely sinful through the commandment.
14 For we know that the law is spiritual; but I am of flesh, sold under sin.
15 For I do not know the product I am working out.
For it is not just what I have a will for that I am busy at, it is just what I hate that I am doing; 16 but if I am doing just what I have no will for, I agree that the law is fine.
17 And now it is no longer I that work out what ensues, but my inmate sin.
18 For I know that there does not reside in me, that is, in my flesh, anything good; for to will is within my reach, but to work out what would be a fine thing is not, 19 for I do not do the good thing which I will, but it is just the bad thing which I do not will that I am busy at.
20 But if it is just what I do not will that I do, it is no longer I that work out what ensues, but sin residing in me.
21 I find the law, then, for me who have the will to do the fine thing, that the bad is what is laid out for me.
22 For I am in sympathy with the law of God as to my inward man, 23 but I see another law in my organism waging war with the law of my mind and taking me prisoner to the law of sin that is in my organism.
24 Wretched man I! who will deliver me out of the body that carries this death? 25 thanks be to God through our Lord Jesus Christ!
So then I myself belong in mind to the service of God’s law, but in flesh to that of sin’s law.
8:1-39
8 Then there is no condemnation now for those who are in Christ Jesus, 2 for the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has given freedom from the law of sin and of death.
3 For, what was impossible to the law in that it was weak by the flesh, God, sending his own son in the likeness of sinning flesh and on account of sin, condemned sin in the flesh 4 in order that the prescription of the law might be fully realized in us who walk along the line not of flesh but of spirit.
5 For those who are along the line of flesh are of the flesh’s mind, but those who are along the line of spirit are of the Spirit’s.
6 For the flesh’s mind is death, but the Spirit’s mind is life and peace.
7 For the flesh’s mind is enmity to God, for it does not submit itself to God’s law, it even cannot; 8 and those who are in flesh cannot please God.
9 But you are not in flesh but in spirit, if God’s Spirit does reside in you; but if anybody does not have Christ’s Spirit, that man is not his.
10 But if Christ is in you, the body is dead on account of sin, but the spirit is life on account of righteousness.
11 And if the Spirit of him who raised Jesus from the dead resides in you, he who raised Christ Jesus from the dead will bring to life your mortal bodies too through his Spirit your inmate.
12 So then, brothers, we are debtors not to the flesh to live along the line of flesh, 13 for if you live along the line of flesh you are going to die; but if by spirit you bring the body’s practices to their death you will live.
14 For as many as are led by God’s Spirit, these are sons of God.
15 For you did not receive a spirit of slavery, back into fear, but you received a spirit of adoption, in which we cry Abba, "Father. " 16 The Spirit itself joins with our spirit in testifying that we are children of God 17 and if children, heirs too: heirs of God, and co-heirs with Christ, if we are indeed his co-sufferers in order that we may share also his glory.
18 For I figure that the sufferings of the present are not worth counting in comparison with the glory that is going to be revealed for us.
19 For the expectancy of all creation is awaiting the revelation of the sons of God.
20 For the creation became subject to futility not of its own free will, but for the purposes of him who created it, with the hope 21 that creation itself is to be set free out of slavery to decay, into the liberty of the glory of God’s children.
22 For we know that all creation together is in groans and pangs up to now; 23 and not only this, but we ourselves too, having as we do the firstfruits of the Spirit, are groaning in ourselves as we await adoption, the redemption of our body.
24 For we were saved by hope; but a seen hope is not a hope (for who hopes for what he sees?), 25 but if we are hoping for what we do not see we await it steadily.
26 And in the same way the Spirit too takes hold to help our weakness; for we do not know what prayers to make as we need to, but the Spirit itself intercedes by groans which cannot be put into words.
27 And he who searches the hearts knows what is the Spirit’s mind, that he is interceding in God’s way for God’s people.
28 And we know that to those who love God, God gives all cooperation for good, to those who, as suited his purpose, are called 29 because those whom he foreknew he did also foreordain to be shaped into the image of his Son so that he should be firstborn among many brothers; 30 and those whom he foreordained, these he also called; and those whom he called, these he also justified; and those whom he justified, these he also glorified.
31 So what shall we say to these things?
If God is for us, who is against us? 32 He who did not stop short of his own Son, but gave him up for us all, how should he do otherwise than bestow everything on us with him? 33 Who will bring charges against God’s chosen? it is God that justifies, 34 who is it that condemns?
It was Christ that died, or rather rose, he who is at God’s right hand, he who is even interceding for us; 35 who will separate us from Christ’s love? will distress or anguish or persecution or hunger or nakedness or danger or the sword, 36 as it is written "On your account we are being done to death all day, we were rated like sheep for slaughtering "? 37 but in all these things we are overwhelmingly victorious through him who loved us.
38 For I am convinced that neither death nor life nor angels nor governments nor present conditions nor future nor powers 39 nor height nor depth nor any other creature will be able to separate us from God’s love in our Lord Christ Jesus.
9:1-33
9 I am speaking the truth in Christ, I am not lying, as in Holy Spirit my conscience bears me out in attesting, 2 that I have a great grief and my heart an unceasing ache.
3 For I could pray that I might myself be for God’s doom cutting me off from Christ in favor of my brothers, my kinsfolk in the way of flesh, 4 who are Israelites, to whom belong the adoption and the glory and the covenants and the gift of the law and the divine service and the promises; 5 whose are the fathers, and from whom in the way of flesh comes the Christ, he who is over everything, God blessed forever Amen!
6 But it is not any such thing as that God’s word has fallen through.
For it is not just everybody who comes from Israel that are Israel.
7 Neither because they are Abraham’s issue are all of them children, but "it will be by Isaac that issue shall be called yours "; 8 that is, it is not just the children of the flesh that are children of God’s, but the children of the promise are counted as issue; 9 for this word, "at this date I will come and Sarah shall have a son, " is one of promise.
10 And not only this, but Rebecca too, having impregnation by one man, our father Isaac, 11 for when they were not yet born nor had done any good or evil act, in order that God’s purpose in the way of choice might remain in force not on the basis of deeds but on the basis of him who gave the call, 12 she was told "the senior shall be enslaved to the junior, " 13 as it is written "I loved Jacob, but Esau I hated. "
14 What shall we therefore say? is there injustice with God? away with the thought! 15 For he says to Moses "I will take pity on whom I do take pity on, and have compassion for whom I do have compassion for. " 16 So then it belongs not to the one who has the will nor to the one who does the running, but to God who takes pity.
17 For the text says to the Pharaoh "I raised you up for this sake, for the sake of showing my power on you, and of having my fame told of throughout the earth. " 18 So then he takes pity on whom he will, but whom he will he hardens.
19 So you will say to me "Why does he go on finding fault? for who stands up against his wish? " 20 Rather, man, who are you that answer back to God? is the product to say to the manufacturer "Why did you make me like this? " 21 Or does the potter not have a right to manage the clay, to make out of the same mass part into a vessel destined for honor and part into one for ignominy? 22 And if God, having a will to show his anger and make known what he could do, endured with great patience vessels for anger, adapted to go to destruction; 23 and, in order to make known the richness of his glory upon vessels for mercy which he had prepared for glory, 24 us whom he also called not only out of the Jews but out of the nations too 25 the same as he says to Hosea "I will call him who was not my people my people, and her who was not loved loved, 26 and in the place where they were told ‘you are not my people,’ there they shall be called sons of the living God. " 27 And Isaiah cries out about Israel "If the number of the sons of Israel be like the sand of the sea, the remnant will be saved, 28 for the Lord will put a word in effect sweepingly and summarily on earth. " 29 And, as Isaiah had said before, "if the Lord of Sabaoth had not left us seed we should have come to be like Sodom and a parallel to Gomorrah. "
30 So what shall we say?
That foreign nations, those that did not go in for righteousness, arrived at righteousness, but the righteousness that comes of faith; 31 but Israel, going in for the law of righteousness, did not attain to the law.
32 Why? because they were not trying on the basis of faith, but as if on that of deeds; they struck on the "stone to strike against, " 33 as it is written "Here I am laying in Sion a stone to strike against and a rock to stumble over; and he who believes in him will not be put to shame. "
10:1-21
10 Brothers, my heart’s goodwill and entreaty to God is in their favor for their salvation.
2 For I testify that they have zeal for God, but not with insight; 3 for, not knowing about God’s righteousness and trying to make good their own, they did not let themselves depend on God’s righteousness.
4 For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every believer.
5 For Moses writes of righteousness on the basis of law "the man who does the things will have life " by it; 6 but righteousness on the basis of faith says thus: "Do not say to yourself ‘Who will go up to the sky?’ " (that is, to bring Christ down;) 7 "or ‘Who will go down into the abyss?’ " (that is, to bring Christ up from the dead). 8 But what does it say?
"The word is near you, in your mouth and in your heart "; that is, the word of faith which we are proclaiming; 9 because if by your mouth you acknowledge Jesus to be Lord, and in your heart you believe that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved.
10 For it is with a heart believing is done leading to righteousness, and it is with a mouth acknowledgment is made leading to salvation.
11 For the text says "Anyone who believes in him will not be put to shame "; 12 for there is no distinction between Jew and Greek, for the same one is Lord of all, rich toward all who call on him; 13 for "everyone who shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved. "
14 How are they then to call on him in whom they have not believed?
And how are they to believe in him of whom they have not heard?
And how are they to hear without a proclaimer? 15 And how are they to proclaim unless they are sent? as it is written "How beautiful are the feet of those who bring the news of good! "
16 But they did not all listen to the good news; for Isaiah says "Lord, who believed what they heard from us? " 17 Then believing comes out of hearing; and hearing, through Christ’s word.
18 But I say, did they not hear? why, "the noise of them went out into all the earth and their words to the ends of the world. " 19 But I say, did Israel not know?
First Moses says "I will challenge your jealousy with what is not a people, provoke you with an insensate nation. " 20 And Isaiah comes out boldly and says "I was found by those who were not looking for me, I showed myself to those who were not inquiring of me. " 21 But as to Israel he says "all day I have spread out my hands to a disobedient and dissident people. "
11:1-36
11 So I am saying, Did God reject his people?
Away with the thought! for I am an Israelite myself, a descendant of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.
2 God did not reject his people whom he foreknew.
Or do you not know in the story of Elijah what the text says, when he is expostulating with God against Israel 3 "Lord, they killed thy prophets, they demolished thy altars, and I was the only one left, and they are after my life " 4 but what does the divine voice say to him?
"I left myself seven thousand men who did not bend a knee to the Baal. " 5 Thus then at the present time too there are leavings in accordance with the choice made by grace.
6 But if it is by grace it is no longer on the basis of deeds, else grace would no longer be grace.
7 What then?
The very thing that Israel is hunting after, this thing it did not win: the chosen ones did win it, but the rest turned callous, 8 as it is written "God gave them a spirit of trance, eyes not to see and ears not to hear, up to this day "; 9 and David says "Let their table become a trap and toils and the bait on a trigger and retribution to them, 10 let their eyes be darkened out of seeing, and break down their back all the time. "
11 So I am saying, Did they stumble in order that they might fall?
Away with the thought; but by their falling into offense the foreign nations get salvation to stir their jealousy.
12 But if their falling into offense is wealth to the world and their failure is wealth to the nations, how much more their full coming in! 13 But to you foreigners I say, Then so far as I am an apostle to foreigners I make much of my office 14 in the hope that I may stir the jealousy of my kindred and save some of them.
15 For if throwing them overboard means reconciliation for the world, what will taking them in be but life from the dead? 16 And if the piece taken out first is sacred, so is the batch; and if the root is sacred, so are the branches.
17 And if some of the branches were broken out, and you, being a piece of wild olive, were grafted in among them and came to share with them the root of the olive-tree’s fatness, 18 do not flout the branches; if you do, it is not you that are carrying the root but the root that is carrying you.
19 Then will you say "Branches were broken out to have me grafted in "? 20 All right: they were broken out by unbelief, and you stand by faith; do not get lofty ideas, but have fears, 21 for if God did not spare the natural branches neither will he spare you.
22 See, then, a kindness and a rigorousness of God’s: toward those who fell rigorousness, but toward you God’s kindness if you keep in touch with the kindness else you too will be cut out.
23 And they, if they do not stick to unbelief, will be grafted in; for God is able to graft them in again.
24 For if you were cut out of the natural wild tree and grafted unnaturally into a quality tree, how much more shall these, the natural ones, be grafted on their own tree!
25 For I do not want you to be without the knowledge of this secret, brothers, in order that you may not feel sagacious, that there has come to Israel a partial callousing until the fullness of the nations gets in, 26 and thus all Israel will be saved, as it is written "He will come out of Sion who shall execute deliverance; he will turn away crimes from Jacob; 27 and this is the covenant from me for them, when I remove their sins. " 28 As to the gospel they are enemies on your account, but as to the choice they are dear on account of the fathers; 29 for God’s gracious gifts and his call are not liable to a change of mind.
30 For as you were formerly disobedient to God but now have come to receive mercy by the disobedience of these, 31 so it was that these too were disobedient now in order that by the mercy to you they too may receive mercy.
32 For God locked everybody up into disobedience in order that he may have mercy on everybody.
33 O the vastness of God’s wealth in both wisdom and knowledge! how unsearchable are his judgments and how untraceable his courses! 34 "For who has known the Lord’s mind? or who has been adviser to him? " 35 "or who has advanced any sum to him and is to have it paid back? " 36 because out of him and through him and into him comes everything.
To him be glory forever; amen.
Romans
12:1-21
12 So, brothers, I urge you by God’s compassion to present your bodies a holy living sacrifice acceptable to God, your rational form of worship; 2 and do not shape yourselves to fit in with these times, but be transformed by reconstitution of your mind so that you may be judges of what is God’s good and acceptable and perfect will.
3 For through the grace given to me let me tell each man among you not to be more lofty-minded than is right, but to mind that he keeps in his right mind, each as God has allotted him a measure of faith.
4 For as we have many organs in one body, but the organs do not all have the same function, 5 so we who are so many are one body in Christ, and individually organs of each other, 6 but having different gifts according to the grace given to us 7 be it prophecy in proportion to faith, be it servitorship in serving, be it the teacher in teaching, 8 be it the exhorter in exhortation; the giver of his goods in largeheartedness, the manager of affairs in devotion to duty, the comforter of misfortunes in cheeriness; 9 love with no sham about it; detesting what is wicked, sticking tight to what is good; 10 in brotherliness mutually affectionate, in honor showing mutual deference, 11 in earnestness not slack, enthusiastic in spirit, conscious of being bound to the Lord’s service, 12 blithe in hope, steadfast in distress, devoted to prayer, 13 showing solidarity with the needs of God’s people, forward in hospitality.
14 Bless your persecutors: bless and do not curse.
15 Gladness with men who are being glad, weeping with weepers.
16 Interested along the same line, for each other; not occupied with thoughts of high things, but drawn into the interests of lowly people; do not feel as if you were great thinkers.
17 Not paying anybody back a bad turn for a bad, keeping in mind what is going to be good before all men; 18 if possible, as far as depends on you, keeping at peace with all men; 19 not taking your own revenges, dear ones, but leave room for God’s anger; for it is written "Mine is vengeance, I will requite, says the Lord. " 20 But "if your enemy is hungry feed him, if he is thirsty give him a drink, for in doing this you will be piling live coals on his head. " 21 Do not be beaten by the bad, but beat the bad with the good.
13:1-14
13 Let every soul be submissive to superior authorities; for there is no authority except by God, and those that there are are given their positions by God, 2 so that he who sets himself against authority is opposing God’s institution; and those who oppose it will have judgment passed on them.
3 For rulers are not a terror to the good deed but to the bad; and you want not to be afraid of the authority? do the good, and you will have praise from it, 4 for it is to you an agent of God’s for the good.
But if you do the bad, do be afraid, for it is not for nothing he wears his sword; for he is an avenging agent of God’s for anger to him who commits the bad deed; 5 for which reason it is necessary to be submissive not only on account of his anger but also on account of your conscience.
6 For this is why you pay taxes too; for they are servitors of God’s steadily at work for that very purpose.
7 Pay everybody what is due him: for whom it is the tax, the tax; for whom the tariff, the tariff; for whom fear, fear; for whom honor, honor.
8 Do not owe anybody anything, except to love each other; for he who loves the other has fulfilled the law.
9 For "You shall not commit adultery, " "You shall not murder, " "You shall not steal, " "You shall not covet, " and any other commandment, are summed up in this sentence, "You shall love your neighbor as yourself. " 10 Love does not do anything bad to a neighbor; so love is fulfillment of the law.
11 And this knowing the crisis, that it is already time you woke up out of sleep, for salvation is nearer us now than when we first believed.
12 It is far on in the night, and day is almost here; so let us throw off the activities of darkness and put on the armor of light; 13 let us behave respectably, as in daylight, not with wild parties and getting drunk, not with sexualism and indecency, not with quarreling and jealousy; 14 but put on the Lord Jesus Christ and do not make arrangements for the flesh for gratifications.
14:1-23
14 And take in the one who is sickly in faith, not for decisions on problems: 2 one man has the faith to eat everything, but the sickly one eats vegetables 3 let the eater not scorn the non-eater nor the non-eater pass judgment on the eater, for God has taken him in.
4 Who are you that are passing judgment on somebody else’s servant? it is to his own master he stands or falls.
And he will be kept standing, for God is powerful to keep him standing.
5 The one rates day above day, the other rates every day let each have his own conviction.
6 He who recognizes the day is recognizing it for the Lord; and he who eats is eating for the Lord, for he thanks God; and he who does not eat does his not eating for the Lord, and thanks God.
7 For no one of us lives for himself and no one dies for himself; 8 for if we live we live for the Lord and if we die we die for the Lord.
So, live or die, we belong to the Lord.
9 For it was for this that Christ died and came to life, that he might be lord over both dead and living.
10 But why do you pass judgment on your brother? or you, why do you scorn your brother? for we shall all be brought up before God’s bench.
11 For it is written "As I live, says the Lord, to me every knee shall bend and every tongue shall make acknowledgment to God "; 12 each of us, then, will give account for himself.
13 So let us no longer pass judgment on each other; but do come to this decision rather, not to set anything to trip one’s brother up.
14 I know and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus that nothing is unholy of itself, only that for the one who thinks something unholy, for him it is unholy.
15 For if because of an article of food your brother is pained, you are no longer going in the way of love.
16 Do not by your food bring him to destruction, one for whom Christ died.
So do not have your good point made a butt for vilification.
17 For the Reign of God is not eating and drinking but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit; 18 for he who lives in this servitude to the Christ is acceptable to God and estimable to men.
19 So then we will aim at what makes for peace and for mutual upbuilding; 20 do not tear God’s work down on account of an article of food.
Everything is clean, but it is a bad thing for the man who runs himself against a snag by his eating.
21 It is a good thing not to eat meat nor drink wine nor one thing that your brother snags himself on.
22 Have faith yourself, such as you have, on your own account before God; happy he who does not pass judgment on himself in regard to what he holds to be right.
23 But he who is in suspense, if he eats, is under condemnation because it is not on the basis of faith, but everything that is not on the basis of faith is a sin.
15:1-33
15 And we powerful ones ought to carry the weakenings of the feeble and not to please ourselves; 2 let each of us please his neighbor in what is good toward upbuilding.
3 For neither did the Christ please himself, but, as it is written, "the insults of those who were insulting you fell on me. " 4 For whatever was written before was written for our instruction in order that through the steadfastness and encouragement in the scriptures we may have hope.
5 And may the God of steadfastness and of encouragement grant you to take the same views among yourselves in Christ Jesus’s way, 6 so that you may with one accord, with a single mind, glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
7 Wherefore take each other in in the same way as the Christ took you in, to the glory of God.
8 For I tell you that Christ was made a serving-man to circumcised men on account of God’s truth so as to assure the promises made to the fathers, 9 and so that the nations should glorify God on account of mercy, as it is written "Because of this I will make acknowledgments to thee among the nations and sing psalms to thy name "; 10 and again it says "Jubilate, nations, with his people "; 11 and again "Praise the Lord, all nations, and let all the peoples laud him "; 12 and again Isaiah says "There shall be Jesse’s root and he who is set up to rule the nations; upon him the nations shall set their hopes. " 13 And may the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing so that you may be plentiful in hope by the power of the Holy Spirit.
14 And I am persuaded as to you myself, brothers, that you too are replete with goodness, filled with all knowledge, able to admonish each other yourselves.
15 But I have written to you, somewhat audaciously in parts, by way of reminding you, because of the grace that was given me from God 16 that I should be a chaplain of Christ Jesus’s to the nations, administering the sacramental service of God’s gospel in order that the nations’ offering should become acceptable, hallowed in Holy Spirit.
17 So I have my boasting in Christ Jesus as to God’s affairs; 18 for I will not venture to make any talk of what Christ did not accomplish through me toward the obedience of the nations, by word and act, 19 in the power of tokens and wonders, in the power of the Spirit, so that from Jerusalem clear round to Illyricum I have thoroughly spread the Christ’s gospel, 20 and making it my ambition to preach it in this way, not where Christ had been named, in order not to build on somebody else’s foundation, 21 but, as it is written, "they shall see who had not been told of him, and they shall realize who have not heard. "
22 Which is why I have generally been blocked from coming to you.
23 But now, no longer having any place in these territories, and having for several years past had a longing to come to you 24 when I am on my way to Spain for I hope to take a look at you as I pass through and to be given a send-off on my way there by you, if I have first had my craving for you partly satisfied 25 now I am taking a trip to Jerusalem on an errand of service to God’s people.
26 For Macedonia and Achaea have been pleased to do a certain act of solidarity toward the poor among God’s people at Jerusalem 27 have been pleased to do it and owed it as a debt; for if the nations came to partake of their spiritual goods they ought also to do them service with material goods.
28 So when I have got through with this and set the seal on this fruit for them I will go to Spain by way of you; 29 and I know that when I come to you I shall come in the fullness of Christ’s blessing.
30 And I urge you, brothers, by our Lord Jesus Christ and by the love of the Spirit, to join me in wrestling in prayer to God for me 31 that I may be delivered from the disobedient in Jerusalem and my errand of service to Jerusalem may turn out acceptable to God’s people, 32 in order that I may come to you with gladness by God’s will.
33 And the God of peace be with you all; amen.
16:1-27
16 And I commend to you our sister Phebe, who is withal a deaconess of the church at Cenchreae, 2 that you receive her in the Lord in a way worthy of God’s people and assist her in whatever affair she wants anything of you in; for she herself has proved a friend in need to many, including me.
3 Give my greetings to Prisca and Aquila, my co-workers in Christ Jesus, 4 who for my life laid down their own necks, whom not I alone thank but also all the churches of the nations; 5 and the meeting at their home.
Give my greetings to my dear friend Epaenetus, who was the first of the province of Asia to come in to Christ.
6 Give my greetings to Mary, who did a great deal of hard work for you.
7 Give my greetings to my kinsmen and fellow-prisoners Andronicus and Junias, who are prominent among the apostles, who also were in Christ before me.
8 Give my greetings to Ampliatus, my dear friend in the Lord.
9 Give my greetings to Urbanus, my co-worker in Christ, and my dear friend Stachys.
10 Give my greetings to Apelles, the tried and true in Christ.
Give my greetings to those who are among Aristobulus’s people.
11 Give my greetings to my kinsman Herodion.
Give my greetings to those of Narcissus’s people who are in the Lord.
12 Give my greetings to Tryphena and Tryphosa, who are working hard in the Lord.
13 Give my greetings to Rufus the chosen in the Lord, and to his mother, who was a mother to me too.
14 Give my greetings to Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and the brothers who are with them.
15 Give my greetings to Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas, and all God’s people who are with them.
16 Give my greetings to each other with a holy kiss.
All the churches of the Christ send you greetings.
17 And I urge you, brothers, to have an eye to those who are creating factions and sore points contrary to the teaching you learned; and shun them, 18 for such are in the service not of our Lord Christ but of their own stomachs, and by their fair words and fine talk they turn the heads of the unsuspicious.
19 For your obedientness has been reported to everybody; so I am happy over you; but I want you to be wise in what makes for good and innocent in what makes for evil.
20 And the God of peace will soon crush Satan under your feet.
The grace of our Lord Jesus be with you.
21 My co-worker Timothy sends you greetings, and my kinsmen Lucius and Jason and Sosipater.
22 I, Tertius, who am writing the letter, send you my greetings in the Lord.
23 Gaius, my host and host to all the church, sends you greetings.
Erastus, the city treasurer, sends you greetings, and Brother Quartus.
24 25 And to him who can fortify you in accordance with my gospel and the proclamation of Jesus Christ, in conformity with the revelation of the secret that had been kept in silence through eternal times 26 but has now been disclosed and through prophetic Scripture, by order of the eternal God, made known throughout the nations for obedience to the faith; 27 to the only wise God, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory forever and ever.
Amen.
1 Corinthians
1:1-31
1 Paul, a chosen apostle of Christ Jesus through God’s will, and Brother Sosthenes, 2 to God’s church at Corinth, men sanctified in Christ Jesus, holy men called, with all who in every place invoke the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, theirs and ours, 3 grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
4 I am always thanking God for you on account of God’s grace given to you in Christ Jesus, 5 that in everything you have been enriched in him, in all the gift of speech and in all knowledge, 6 as the testimony of the Christ has become a settled thing among you, 7 so that you do not come short in any grace while you await the manifestation of our Lord Jesus Christ, 8 who will also settle you to be entirely blameless on the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
9 God is faithful, through whom you were called into solidarity with his son Jesus Christ our Lord.
10 But I urge you, brothers, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, all to say the same thing and not to have rifts among you, but to be welded into the same mind and the same sentiments.
11 For it was stated to me about you by Chloe’s people, my brothers, that there are discords among you.
12 I mean this: that each of you is saying "I am a Paul man, " "And I am an Apollos man, " "And I am a Cephas man, " "And I am a Christ man "; 13 the Christ is broken up!
Was Paul crucified for you, or were you baptized into Paul’s name? 14 I am thankful that I did not baptize any of you but Crispus and Gaius, 15 so as not to have someone say you were baptized into my name.
16 And I did baptize Stephanas’s family too; after all, I do not know whether I baptized anybody else.
17 For Christ did not send me to baptize but to bring the gospel; not in wisdom of language, in order that the Christ’s cross may not be nullified.
18 For speech about the cross is foolishness to those who are headed for destruction, but to us the saved it is the power of God.
19 For it is written "I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and the discernment of the discerning I will discredit. " 20 What becomes of a philosopher? of a scholar? of a scientist? did not God make the world’s wisdom foolish? 21 For since in God’s wisdom the world had not through wisdom known God, God was pleased to save believers through the foolishness of the preached message 22 since Jews ask for tokens and Greeks look for wisdom, 23 but we preach a crucified Christ, to Jews a thing unmentionable, and to Gentiles foolishness, 24 but to the called themselves, Jews and Greeks both, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God; 25 because what is foolish of God’s is wiser than men, and what is weak of God’s is stronger than men.
26 For, brothers, look at your calling, that it is not a case of many who are wise in a mortal sense, many powerful, many aristocratic, 27 but God chose the foolish parts of the world in order to shame the wise men, and God chose the weak parts of the world in order to shame the strong parts, 28 and God chose the lowborn parts and the scorned parts, the nothings, in order to supersede with them the somethings, 29 so that no mortal should boast in the presence of God.
30 And from him you are something in Christ Jesus, who became to us wisdom from God, righteousness and sanctification and redemption, 31 in order to have it as is written, "Let him who boasts boast in the Lord. "
2:1-16
2 And I, brothers, when I came to you, came not announcing God’s testimony to you with a superior quality of language or wisdom; 2 for I decided not to know anything among you but Jesus Christ, and him crucified; 3 and I showed weakness and fear and much trembling while I was with you, 4 and my language and my proclamation were not with persuasive words of wisdom but with proof by Spirit and power, 5 in order that your faith may not be based on men’s wisdom but on God’s power.
6 But we do speak wisdom among those who are qualified; but a wisdom not of this world nor of this world’s supersedable rulers, 7 but we speak God’s wisdom in a secret knowledge, the wisdom hidden away, which God foreordained for our glory before time was; 8 which no one of this world’s rulers knows, for if they had known it they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory, 9 but, as it is written, what eye has not seen and ear has not heard and man’s heart has not thought of, the things that God has prepared for those who love him; 10 for God has revealed them to us through the Spirit.
For the Spirit searches everything, even the deep things of God.
11 For who of men knows the things personal to a man except the man’s spirit which is in him? in the same way nobody knows the things personal to God except God’s Spirit.
12 And we received not the world’s spirit but the Spirit from God, in order that we might know the things granted to us by God; 13 which things we likewise speak not in words taught by human wisdom but in Spirit-taught, matching spiritual with spiritual.
14 But an animal man does not accept the things that belong to God’s Spirit; for they are foolishness to him, and he cannot know them, because they are to be spiritually examined; 15 but the spiritual man examines everything and is himself examined by nobody.
16 For "who knows the Lord’s mind and will instruct him? "
And we have Christ’s mind.
3:1-23
3 And on my part, brothers, I could not speak to you as spiritual men but as flesh men, as infants in Christ.
2 I fed you milk, not regular food, for as yet you did not have the capability; why, even now you do not.
3 For you are still fleshly.
For where there is jealousy and quarreling among you, are you not fleshly and walking in human fashion? 4 For when one says "I am a Paul man, " but another "I an Apollos man, " are you not human?
5 What is Apollos, then?
And what is Paul?
Servitors through whom you believed; and each as the Lord gave to him: 6 I did the setting out, Apollos the watering, but God made the growth.
7 So that neither the setter-out is anything nor the waterer, but God who makes the growth.
8 And the setter-out and the waterer are one. But each will get his pay appropriately to his labor.
9 For we are God’s assistants; you are God’s farm God’s building.
10 In accordance with the grace given to me, like a wise master-builder I laid a foundation, and another is building on it.
But let each one look out how he builds on it.
11 For nobody can lay any other foundation beside the one that has been laid, which is Jesus Christ.
12 But if one builds onto the foundation gold, silver, fine stones, wood, weed-stalks, straw, 13 each man’s work will show up. For the day will reveal it, because in fire it is disclosed, and the very fire will test what sort of work each man’s is.
14 If anyone’s work that he built on it stands, he will receive payment; 15 if anyone’s work burns up, he will be the loser, but he will himself come safe through, but in such fashion as one comes through a fire.
16 Do you not know that you are a temple of God, and God’s Spirit makes its home in you? 17 If anybody undoes God’s temple, God will undo him.
For God’s temple is sacred; and you are it. 18 Let nobody deceive himself.
If anybody thinks he is a wise one among you, in these times let him become a fool in order that he may come to be wise; 19 for this world’s wisdom is foolishness in the presence of God, for it is written "he who clutches the wise in the midst of their shiftiness " 20 and again "The Lord knows wise men’s ponderings to be futile. " 21 Consequently let nobody boast about men. For everything belongs to you, 22 be it Paul or Apollos or Cephas or world or life or death or present or future: everything belongs to you, 23 and you to Christ, and Christ to God.
4:1-21
4 Let a man rate us as agents, and trustees of God’s secrets.
2 Now then, what is wanted in trustees is that one should be found faithful.
3 But to me it is highly unimportant that I should be examined by you or by a human investigation.
Why, I do not even examine myself; 4 for I have nothing on my conscience, but I am not made out righteous by this.
But it is the Lord that is my examiner.
5 Consequently do not pass judgment on anything too soon; not till the Lord comes, who will both throw light on the things hidden in darkness and make the intentions of hearts visible; and then each will get his praise from God.
6 But in treating all this as though it applied to myself and Apollos I did it on your account, brothers, in order that you might learn on us not to go beyond the record, so that you should not be puffed up one of you on one’s behalf against another.
7 For who is differentiating you? and what do you have that you did not receive?
And if you did receive it, why are you boasting as if you had not? 8 You have had all you could hold already; you have already grown rich; you have come into the kingship without us and I wish you had come into the kingship so that we too might come into it with you.
9 For I guess God has put us apostles last on the program like men condemned to death, because we have become a spectacle for the world, men and angels both.
10 We are fools for Christ, but you are intelligent men in Christ; we weak, but you strong; you in high standing, but we disreputable.
11 Down to the present moment we go hungry, go thirsty, go naked, get hit with fists, go homeless, 12 work hard with our own hands, pronounce blessings while we are being abused, bear up while we are being persecuted, 13 give encouragement while we are being disparaged; it comes to be as if we were the offscourings of the world, the scum of everything, up to now.
14 I am not writing these things to shame you, but to admonish you as dearly-loved children of mine.
15 For if you should have ten thousand tutors in Christ, many fathers you would not; for I, through the gospel, brought you to birth in Christ Jesus.
16 So I urge you, be imitators of me.
17 That was the very reason why I sent you Timothy, who is my dearly-loved and trusted child in the Lord, who will remind you of my ways in Christ Jesus, as I teach everywhere in every church.
18 But some have been puffed up as if I were not coming to you; 19 but come to you I speedily will, if the Lord permit, and know not the words of the puffed-up ones but their power, 20 for the Reign of God is not in words but in power.
21 What do you want? am I to come to you with a rod or in love and the spirit of meekness?
5:1-13
5 There is talk of such a thing as unchastity among you, and such unchastity as there is not even among the heathen, so that one has his father’s wife; 2 and you are puffed up, and did not rather go to mourning, so that the one who had done that thing would be got out from your midst? 3 For I, absent in body but present in spirit, have already, as present, come to the decision you and my spirit, 4 together with the power of our Lord Jesus, being assembled in the Lord Jesus Christ’s name 5 to hand over to Satan the man with such a record, the one that did that in that fashion, for destruction of the flesh in order that the spirit may be saved on the day of the Lord.
6 Your boast is not a good one.
Do you not know that a little yeast makes the whole batch of dough yeasty? 7 Clean out the old yeast in order that you may be a new batch as you are unyeasty men for our passover is sacrificed, Christ, 8 so let us keep the feast not with old yeast nor with yeast of viciousness and villainy but with yeastless bread of candor and truth.
9 I wrote to you in my letter not to be mixed up with libertines; 10 not in general, this world’s libertines, or overreaching and grasping people or idolaters, since you would be obliged to go out of the world; 11 but I did tell you not to be mixed up if anyone who goes by the name of brother is a libertine or overreaching or an idolater or abusive or drunken or grasping, not even to eat with the one who is like that.
12 For what business is it of mine to judge the outsiders? do not you do the judging of the insiders, 13 but God the judging of the outsiders?
Get the vicious man out of your company.
6:1-20
6 Does anyone of you, when he has a difficulty with another, dare to bring the case before the lawless and not before the holy? 2 Or do you not know that the holy will judge the world? and if the world gets judged by you, are you unfit for petty trials? 3 Do you not know we shall judge angels? not to say secular matters.
4 Then if you do have secular cases to try, it is just those who do not amount to anything in the church that you set on the bench! 5 I say it to your shame.
Are you so totally without any wise man among you who can decide between his brothers, 6 but brother goes to law with brother, and that before unbelievers? 7 It is a blot on you anyhow, to begin with, that you do have lawsuits with each other; why not sooner have injustice done you? why not sooner have your rightful dues held back? 8 But you yourselves do injustice and hold back rightful dues, and to brothers at that; 9 or do you not know that unjust men will not inherit God’s Reign?
Make no mistake: neither libertines nor idolaters nor adulterers nor any who practice sodomy or submit to it 10 nor thieves nor overreaching or drunken or abusive or grasping people will inherit the Reign of God.
11 And that is what you, some of you, were; but you were washed clean! you were sanctified! but you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and in the Spirit of our God!
12 Everything is free to me, but not everything is advantageous.
Everything is free to me, but I for my part am not going to be brought into subjection by anything.
13 Foods for the stomach, and the stomach for foods but God will supersede both that and those.
But the body is not for unchastity but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body; 14 and God both raised the Lord and will raise us up by his power.
15 Do you not know that your bodies are organs of Christ?
So am I to take away the Christ’s organs and make them organs of a loose woman? away with the thought! 16 Or do you not know that he who has a connection with a loose woman is one body? for "the two shall become one flesh, " it says.
17 But he who has a connection with the Lord is one spirit.
18 Keep clear of unchastity!
Any sin that a man commits is outside the body; but he who has unchaste relations sins against his own body.
19 Or do you not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit that you have in you, which comes to you from God, and you do not belong to yourselves? 20 For you were bought and paid for.
Glorify God in your body.
7:1-40
7 But as to what you wrote about: It is a good thing for a man not to touch a woman. 2 But for fear of unchastities let each have his own wife and each woman her own husband.
3 Let the husband pay to the wife what he owes her, and likewise the wife too to the husband.
4 The wife is not entitled to control her own body, but the husband; and likewise the husband too is not entitled to control his own body, but the wife.
5 Do not hold back each other’s rightful dues, unless it may be temporarily by agreement in order that you may have a while for prayer and again be together, so that Satan may not tempt you because of your incontinence.
6 But this I say in the way of tolerance, not as an order; 7 but I wish all men to be the same as I myself am but each has a gift of his own from God, one in this way and one in that.
8 But I say to the unmarried and the widows, it is a good thing for them if they remain the same as I am; 9 but if they are not masters of themselves let them marry, for it is better to marry than to be burned.
10 But married couples I enjoin, not I but the Lord, that wife must not separate from husband 11 or if she does, let her remain unmarried or make up with her husband and that husband must not divorce wife.
12 But to the rest I, not the Lord, say, if any brother has an unbelieving wife and she is satisfied to live with him, let him not divorce her, 13 and whatever woman has an unbelieving husband and he is satisfied to live with her, let her not divorce her husband.
14 For the unbelieving husband is consecrated in the wife and the unbelieving wife is consecrated in the husband; else your children would be unclean; but in fact they are holy.
15 But if the unbeliever separates, let him; the brother or sister is not fettered in such cases. But it is in peace that God has called us.
16 For how do you know, wife, whether you will save your husband? or how do you know, husband, whether you will save your wife?
17 Only, as the Lord has allotted each his share, as God has called each one, so let him walk.
And so I direct in all the churches.
18 One was called in circumcised condition let him not obliterate the mark; one was called in uncircumcised condition let him not get himself circumcised.
19 Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing; but the keeping of God’s commandments.
20 In the call that came to each, in that let him remain.
21 You were called as a slave do not be concerned about it, but if you do have the chance to become free, prefer to carry on.
22 For the slave who has been called in the Lord is the Lord’s freedman; likewise the freeman when he is called is Christ’s slave; 23 you were bought and paid for do not become slaves of men.
24 Let each one, brothers, as a member of God’s household remain in what he was called in.
25 But as to maidens I do not have any order given by the Lord, but give my judgment as one to whom the Lord has granted the mercy of being trusted.
26 I think this is best, then, in view of the straits we are in: it is best for a man to be so.
27 You are bound to a wife do not try for release; you are free from a wife do not try for a wife.
28 But if you do marry you have not sinned, and if the maiden marries she has not sinned; but such will have distress for the flesh, and I am having consideration for you.
29 But this I do say, brothers, the times are under pressure, so that hereafter those who have wives should be as if they did not have them, 30 and those who weep as if they were not weeping, and those who rejoice as if they were not rejoicing, and those who buy as not having obtained title, 31 and those who deal with the world as not having the use of it; for this world’s shows are transient.
32 But I want you free from anxieties.
The unmarried man is anxious over what belongs to the Lord, how to please the Lord; 33 but the man who has married is anxious over what belongs to the world, how to please his wife, 34 and is divided.
And the unmarried woman and the maiden is anxious over what belongs to the Lord in order that she may be holy both in body and in spirit; but the woman who has married is anxious over what belongs to the world, how to please her husband.
35 But I am saying this in your own interest, not in order to put a halter on you but with a view to what will be respectable and favorable to undistracted listening to the Lord.
36 But if anybody feels that he will be acting discreditably toward his maiden if she is overage, and that is the way it has to be, let him do what he will, he is not sinning; let them marry.
37 But he who stands fast in his heart, not being under a compulsion but having freedom to go by his own will, and has come to this decision in his own heart, to keep his maiden, will be doing well.
38 So that equally he who marries his maiden is doing well, and he who does not will be doing better.
39 A wife is bound for such time as her husband is alive; but if her husband goes to his rest she is free to marry whom she will, only in the Lord; 40 but she is happier if she remains so, in my opinion.
And I think I too have God’s spirit.
8:1-13
8 And as to meat from idol-sacrifices: we are aware that we all have knowledge.
Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up.
2 If anybody thinks he knows anything, he has not known yet as one needs to know.
3 But if anybody loves God, that man is known by him.
4 Well, then, as to the eating of meat from idol-sacrifices, we are aware that there is no such thing in the world as an idol-god and that there is no God but one 5 for, though it be a fact that there are so-called gods whether in heaven or on earth (as there are many "gods " and many "lords "), 6 yet for us there is one God, the Father, out of whom comes everything and into whom come we; and one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom comes everything, and through him we.
7 But not everybody has the knowledge in him; and some, by habituation to the idol-god heretofore, eat as from an idol-sacrifice, and their conscience, being weak, is defiled.
8 And a food will not be a recommendation to God for us: we are neither in inferior standing if we do not eat nor in especially good standing if we do.
9 But look out that this right of yours does not possibly become a snag for the feet of the weak.
10 For if one sees you, the one who has the knowledge, taking a meal in an idol-temple, will not his conscience, weak as he is, be built up into eating meat from idol-sacrifices? 11 why, by your knowledge the weak one is perishing, the brother on whose account Christ died! 12 And so, sinning against the brothers and battering their conscience when it is weak, you sin against Christ.
13 Wherefore if a food is tripping my brother up I will go without meat forever in order not to trip my brother up.
9:1-27
9 Am I not a free man? am I not an apostle? have I not seen our Lord Jesus? are not you in the Lord my work? 2 If for others I am not an apostle, for you anyhow I am; for you in the Lord are the seal of my apostleship.
3 My defense to my examiners is this: 4 Do we not have the right to eat and drink? 5 do we not have the right to take around a wife who is one of the sisters, the same as the rest of the apostles do, and the Lord’s brothers, and Cephas? 6 or do Barnabas and I alone have no right not to work? 7 Whoever serves in the army and pays his own expenses? who plants a vineyard and does not eat the fruit of it, or who tends a flock and does not eat any of the milk of the flock? 8 Am I talking like this from a human point of view, or does not the law too say this? 9 For in the law of Moses it says "You shall not muzzle a threshing beast. "
Does God care for the beasts, 10 or is it distinctly on our account that he says it?
Why, it was put in on our account, because the plower ought to plow in hope, and the thresher in hope of coming in for a share.
11 If we sowed the spiritual things for you, is it anything great if we are to harvest the material things from you? 12 If others come in for a share of rights over you, do not we all the more?
But we did not use those rights, but are putting up with everything in order that we may not cause any obstruction to the gospel of the Christ.
13 Do you not know that those who do the sacred work eat the sanctuary’s supplies, those who attend the altar participate with the altar? 14 in the same way the Lord prescribed to those who were announcing the gospel that they should live by the gospel.
15 But I have not availed myself of any of this.
And I did not write this in order that it should come so in my case, for I had better die sooner than nobody shall make my boast an empty one. 16 For if I preach the gospel it is no boast for me, for I am under compulsion; for there is a woe for me if I do not.
17 For if I do this voluntarily I get pay, but if involuntarily I have a stewardship entrusted to me.
18 What is my pay then? that in my preaching I shall render the gospel free of expense, so as to make no use of my rights as preacher.
19 For when I was free from everybody I enslaved myself to everybody in order to get the greatest number; 20 and I behaved to the Jews like a Jew in order to get Jews, to those under the law like one under the law when I was not myself under the law, in order to get those under the law, 21 to the lawless like a lawless man when I was not lawless for God but law-abiding for Christ, in order to get the lawless; 22 I became anything to anybody in order anyhow to save some.
23 And I do everything on account of the gospel, in order to become a fellow-participant in it.
24 Do you not know that those who run in the races all run, but one gets the prize?
Run in such a way that you may arrive.
25 And everybody who goes into the contests masters himself in every respect; they, indeed, aiming to win a perishable wreath, but we an imperishable.
26 Well, then, I run not in aimless fashion; I spar not in the way of shadowboxing, 27 but bang my body about and make a slave of it, for fear that after I had been herald to others I should myself fail to make good.
10:1-33
10 For we do not want you to lack the knowledge, brothers, that our fathers were all of them under the cloud and all went through the sea 2 and all had themselves baptized to Moses in the cloud and in the sea, 3 and all ate the same spiritual food 4 and all drank the same spiritual drink (for they drank out of a spiritual rock that went along with them; and the rock was the Christ), 5 but God was not pleased with most of them; for they fell along the desert road.
6 And in these respects they were types of us, so that we may not take to desiring bad things as some of them did.
7 And do not become idolaters, as did some of them, as it is written "The people sat down to eat and drink and stood up to play. " 8 And let us not go into sexual debauchery, as some of them did, and twenty-three thousand fell in one day.
9 And let us not put the Lord to a test, as some of them tested him and perished by the snakes.
10 And do not grumble, as some of them grumbled and perished by the destroyer.
11 And these things befell them by way of types, and were recorded for admonition to us, in whom the ages have reached their goal.
12 Consequently, let him who thinks he is standing look out that he does not fall.
13 There has not any temptation caught you but such as is the lot of man.
And God is faithful, who will not let you be tempted beyond your power, but with the temptation will also make the way out so that you may be able to stand it.
14 Wherefore, my dear friends, flee from idolatry.
15 I speak as one does to sensible men; judge of what I say yourselves.
16 The blessing-cup that we bless, is it not participation in the blood of the Christ? the loaf of bread that we break, is it not participation in the body of the Christ? 17 because we, many as we are, are one loaf, one body; for we all share in the one loaf.
18 Look at Israel, Israel in the fleshly sense: are not those who eat the sacrifices participants with the altar?
19 What am I saying then? that an idol-sacrifice is anything, or that there is any such thing as an idol-god? 20 no, but that what they sacrifice they sacrifice to demons and not to God. And I do not want you to become participants with demons.
21 You cannot drink the Lord’s cup and demons’ cup! you cannot share the Lord’s table and demons’ table! 22 Or are we teasing the Lord into jealousy? are we stronger than he?
23 Everything is permissible, but not everything is advantageous.
Everything is permissible, but not everything is constructive.
24 Let nobody look after what is for himself, but what is for the other man.
25 Eat anything that is offered for sale at a market, without making any inquiries for reasons of conscience; 26 for "the earth and all that fills it belong to the Lord. " 27 If one of the unbelievers invites you and you choose to go, eat anything that is brought to the table without making any inquiries for reasons of conscience.
28 But if somebody tells you "this is sacrifice meat, " do not eat, because of him, the one that informed you, and for reasons of conscience 29 and I do not mean one’s own conscience but the other man’s; for to what purpose is my liberty judged by another conscience? 30 If I partake with gratitude, why am I vilified over what I give thanks for?
31 So, whether you are eating or drinking or doing anything, do everything to God’s glory.
32 Have nothing about you that either Jew or Greek or the church of God could stub their toes on, 33 in the same way as I am pleasing everybody about everything, not looking out for my own interests but for those of the many, that they may be saved.
11:1-34
11 Be imitators of me in the same way as I am of Christ.
2 And I praise you that you thoroughly remember me and stick to the correct line as I passed it on to you.
3 But I want you to know that every man’s head is the Christ, and a woman’s head the man, and the Christ’s head God.
4 Any man praying or prophesying with anything on his head is disgracing his head. 5 But a woman praying or prophesying with her head uncovered is disgracing her head, for it is one and the same thing as a shaved woman.
6 For if a woman is not covered, let her have her hair cut too; but if having her hair cut or shaved is disgraceful for a woman, let her be covered.
7 For a man ought not to have his head covered, he being the image and glory of God; but woman is the glory of man, 8 for man does not have his being out of woman but woman out of man; 9 for, also, man was not created on account of the woman but a woman on account of the man.
10 For this reason the woman ought to have a safeguard over her head because of the angels.
11 There is not in the Lord, though, woman apart from man nor man apart from woman; 12 for as the woman comes out of the man, so does the man too come through the woman; and everything comes out of God.
13 Judge in your own consciences: is it proper for a woman to pray uncovered to God? 14 Does not even nature itself teach you that if a man has long hair it is a dishonor to him, 15 but if a woman has long hair it is a glory to her, because she is given her hair to serve as a wrap?
16 But if anybody sees fit to be disputatious, we do not have such a custom, and neither do God’s churches.
17 But this injunction I give without praise for your way of coming together not for the better but for the worse: 18 for, in the first place, when you come together in a church meeting I hear there are divisions among you; and to some extent I believe it, 19 for there do have to be factions among you in order that it may become apparent among you which ones are of the right kind.
20 So when you meet together there is no eating a supper of the Lord’s, 21 for each one is getting a start in the eating to take his own supper, and one goes hungry and another has had too much drink.
22 Why, have you no houses for eating and drinking? or are you despising the church of God and shaming those who have nothing?
What am I to say to you? am I to praise you over this?
I do not.
23 For I received from the Lord that same thing that I handed on to you, that the Lord Jesus, on the night when he was to be arrested, took bread 24 and gave thanks and broke it and said "This is my body that goes for you; do this in remembrance of me "; 25 in the same way the cup too, after eating the supper, saying "This cup is the new covenant in my blood; do this, as often as you drink, in remembrance of me. " 26 For as often as you eat this bread and drink the cup, you are announcing the death of the Lord, until he come.
27 Consequently one who eats the Lord’s bread or drinks his cup in unworthy fashion will be liable for the body and blood of the Lord.
28 But let a man see how he is to be rated, and in such fashion eat from the loaf and drink from the cup; 29 for he who eats and drinks is eating and drinking a judgment upon himself when he does not distinguish the body.
30 That is why there are among you many weakly and sick, and a number have gone to their rest.
31 But if we saw how we stood, we should not be judged; 32 but in being judged we are being disciplined by the Lord, in order that we may not be condemned with the world.
33 Consequently, my brothers, when you come together to eat wait for each other.
34 If anybody is hungry let him eat at home, in order that your coming together may not run you into judgment.
And as to the rest I will give directions when I shall come.
12:1-31
12 And about the workings of the Spirit, brothers, I do not wish you to be ignorant.
2 You know when you were heathen you were carried away to the voiceless idols, however it was done.
3 For this reason I make it known to you that nobody speaking in the Spirit of God says "Jesus is accursed, " and nobody can say "Jesus is Lord " except in Holy Spirit.
4 But there are different lines of gifts, but the same Spirit; 5 and there are different lines of service and the same Lord; 6 and there are different lines of divine workings and the same God, he who works everything in everybody.
7 But each one is given such a manifestation of the Spirit as will be advantageous.
8 For one through the Spirit is given words of wisdom, and another words of knowledge after the same Spirit, 9 somebody else faith, in the same Spirit, and another gifts of healing, in the one Spirit, 10 and another miracle-workings, another prophecy, another discrimination between spirits, somebody else different kinds of languages, and another the translating of languages.
11 But in all these one and the same Spirit is at work, distributing to each individually as it wishes.
12 For just as the body is one and has many organs, but all the organs of the body, many as they are, are one body, so it is with the Christ; 13 for we too were all baptized in one Spirit into one body, be we Jews or Greeks, be we slaves or freemen, and were all given one Spirit to drink in.
14 For neither is the body one organ, but many.
15 If the foot says "Because I am not a hand I am no part of the body " it is not on that account no part of the body, 16 and if the ear says "Because I am not an eye I am no part of the body " it is not on that account no part of the body.
17 If the body were wholly eye, where would be the hearing? if wholly ear, where the smelling? 18 But now God did put the organs each one of them in the body as he chose; 19 and if all were one organ, where would be the body? 20 but now there are many organs but one body.
21 And the eye cannot say to the hand "I have no need of you, " or again the head to the feet "I have no need of you, " 22 but, much rather, what seem to be weak organs of the body are necessary, 23 and it is just what we think are less honorable parts of the body that we invest with special honor, and the indecorous parts of us have special decorum, 24 but the decorous parts of us stand in no need.
But God commingled the body, giving special honor to what came short, 25 in order that there might not be division in the body, but the organs might feel the same solicitude for each other; 26 and be it that one organ suffers, all the organs suffer with it; be it that one organ is decorated, all the organs rejoice with it.
27 And you are Christ’s body, and, individually, organs; 28 and in the church God has put some, first, as apostles; secondly, as prophets; thirdly, as teachers; then miracles, then gifts of healing, assistance, management, different kinds of languages.
29 Are all apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? do all work miracles? 30 do all have gifts of healing? do all speak languages? do all translate?
31 But aspire to the greater gifts.
And let me point out to you an even preeminent course.
13:1-13
13 If I speak the languages of men and angels but do not have love, I turn into a gong sounding or a cymbal clashing; 2 and if I have prophecy and know all secrets and all knowledge, and if I have all faith so as to move mountains, but do not have love, I am nothing; 3 and if I give all my possessions in charity, and if I give up my body in order to boast, but do not have love, I am none the better.
4 Love is patient, kind; love is not jealous; love does not show off, does not get inflated, 5 does not shock people, does not look out for its own interests, does not get provoked, does not count its injuries, 6 is not glad at a wrong deed but glad to have the truth made glad, 7 stands everything, believes everything, hopes everything, holds out through everything.
8 Love never drops away; but as for prophecies they will be superseded, as for languages they will come to a stop, as for knowledge it will be superseded; 9 for it is in part that we know and in part that we prophesy, 10 but when the complete comes the partial will be superseded.
11 When I was a child I used a child’s language, took a child’s views, made a child’s calculations; since I have become a man I have superseded the child’s ways.
12 For we see now by a mirror, as a puzzle to be guessed at, but then face to face; now I know in part, but then I shall be aware in the same way as he was aware of me.
13 And now there remain faith, hope, love these three. And greatest of these is love.
14:1-40
14 Aim at love; but aspire to the manifestations of the Spirit, but preferably that you should prophesy.
2 For he who speaks a language is speaking not to men but to God, for nobody understands, but in spirit he is speaking secrets; 3 but he who prophesies is speaking upbuilding and exhortation and comfort for men.
4 He who speaks a language is building himself up; but he who prophesies is building up the church.
5 And I want to have you all speak languages, but preferably to have you prophesy; and he who prophesies is superior to him who speaks languages, except in case he translates so that the church may get an upbuilding.
6 And now, brothers, if I come to you speaking languages what good shall I do you unless I speak to you either in revelation or in knowledge or in prophecy or teaching? 7 It is the same with lifeless sound-producers: be it flute or be it harp, if it does not make a distinction in the notes how will the tune that is being played be known? 8 For, again, if a trumpet makes an unclear sound, who will get ready for war? 9 So with you too: if by your tongues you do not produce plain speech, how will the meaning that is being spoken be known? for you will be talking into the air.
10 There are so many kinds, say, of sounds in the world, and none unvocal; if, then, 11 I do not know the force of the sound, I shall be senseless to the speaker and the speaker senseless to me.
12 In the same way you: since you are aspirants to spirit-gifts, try to excel for the upbuilding of the church.
13 Wherefore, let him who speaks a language pray that he may translate.
14 For if I pray in a language, my spirit is praying but my mind is not fruiting.
15 So what is the thing to do?
I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the mind too; I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the mind too.
16 Since if you bless in spirit, how is he who occupies the commoner’s place to say the Amen to your thanks, since he does not know what you are saying? 17 you are giving thanks well, but the other man is not being built up.
18 I thank God, I speak languages more freely than any of you; 19 but in meeting I had rather speak five sentences with my mind, in order to enlighten others too, than ten thousand sentences in a language.
20 Brothers, do not be children in intelligence; as to viciousness do be childlike, but in intelligence be adult.
21 In the law it stands written "By men of alien language and by alien lips I will speak to this people, and not even so will they listen to me, says the Lord. " 22 Consequently languages are for a token not to believers but to unbelievers, but prophecy not to unbelievers but to believers.
23 If then the whole church meets together and all are speaking languages, and commoners or unbelievers come in, will they not say you are crazy? 24 But if all are prophesying, and some unbeliever or commoner comes in, he is reproved by all, he is put through an examination by all, 25 the things hidden in his heart come out; and thus he will throw himself down on his face and do reverence to God, declaring that God really is among you.
26 So what is the thing to do, brothers?
When you come together, each has a psalm, has a teaching, has a revelation, has a language, has a translation let everything be so done as to build up: 27 suppose somebody is speaking a language, let it be done by twos or at most threes, and one after another, and one translate; 28 but if there is no translator, let him keep silence in meeting, and speak to himself and to God.
29 And of prophets let two or three speak and the others assess; 30 but if a revelation comes to another who is in the seats, let the first keep silence.
31 For you can all prophesy one at a time, in order that all may learn and all receive exhortation; 32 and prophets’ spirits subordinate themselves to prophets, 33 for God is not a God of disorder but of peace.
As in all meetings of God’s people, 34 let the women keep silence in the meetings; for it is not permissible for them to speak, but let them subordinate themselves, as the law too says.
35 But if they wish to find out something, let them put questions to their husbands at home; for it is disgraceful for a woman to speak in meeting.
36 Or was it from you that the word of God started, or did it arrive at you alone? 37 If anybody is supposed to be a prophet or gifted with the Spirit, let him recognize what I am writing to you as being a commandment of the Lord; 38 but if somebody discredits it, discredit that.
39 Consequently, brothers, aspire to prophesying, and do not bar speaking languages; 40 but let everything be done in a respectable and orderly way.
15:1-58
15 But, brothers, let me make you acquainted with the gospel I preached to you, the same that you received, the same that you stand on, 2 the same that you are saved by, in what terms I preached it to you, if you are holding to it except in case you believed for nothing! 3 For I handed on to you as a foremost thing the same thing I received, that Christ died for our sins in accordance with scripture, 4 and that he was buried, and that he rose the third day in accordance with scripture, 5 and that he appeared to Cephas, then to the Twelve; 6 then he appeared to above five hundred brothers at a time, of whom the majority are with us until now, but some have gone to their rest; 7 then he appeared to James, then to all the apostles; 8 and last of all, as it were to the runt born by abortion, he appeared to me too.
9 For I am the most insignificant of the apostles, not fit to be called an apostle, because I persecuted God’s church; 10 but by the grace of God I am what I am, and his grace to me was not a failure, but I out-toiled all of them yet not I, but God’s grace with me.
11 So, be it I or they, we preach that way and you believed that way.
12 But if Christ is preached to have risen from the dead, how do some among you say there is no such thing as resurrection of the dead? 13 But if there is no such thing as resurrection of the dead, not even Christ has risen; 14 and if Christ has not risen, then our preaching has nothing in it, your faith has nothing in it either, 15 and into the bargain we are found to be false witnesses against God, because we testified as to God that he raised the Christ, whom he did not raise if we are to take it that the dead do not rise.
16 For if the dead do not rise, not even Christ has risen; 17 and if Christ has not risen, your faith is futile, you are still in your sins.
18 Then those who have gone to their rest in Christ perished too.
19 If we are hoping in Christ in this life only, we are most pitiable of all men.
20 But now Christ has risen from the dead, first to come in of those who have gone to their rest.
21 For since death came through a man, resurrection of the dead came through a man too.
22 For as by Adam all are dying, so too by the Christ all are going to be brought to life, 23 but each when his turn comes: Christ the first to come in; then those who belong to Christ, at his coming; 24 then the end, when he hands the empire over to God the Father, when he has superseded every government and every authority and power, 25 for he has to reign "until he has put all enemies under his feet. " 26 Last of the enemies death is superseded.
27 For "he has subjected everything under his feet "; but, when it says "everything " is subjected, evidently exclusive of him who subjected everything to him.
28 But when everything has been subjected to him, then the Son himself too will be subjected to him who subjected everything to him, in order that God may be everything in everything.
29 Because what will those who get baptized for the dead do? if dead men do not rise anyhow, why go the length of getting baptized for them? 30 Why, too, do we ourselves run risks every moment? 31 I am dying day after day, I swear it by the boast of you, brothers, which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord.
32 If as far as men were concerned I fought the beasts in Ephesus, what good does it do me? if dead men do not rise, "let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die. " 33 Make no mistake; "keeping bad company spoils good characters "; 34 sober up honestly and do not sin; for some folks are sheer materialists I speak to stir your sense of shame.
35 But somebody will say "How do the dead rise? and with what sort of body do they come? " 36 Silly man, what you yourself sow does not come to life unless it dies; 37 and of what you sow you sow not the body that is to come but a naked grain, of wheat say or some one of the rest; 38 and God gives it a body as he has willed, and to each of the seeds a body of its own.
39 Flesh is not all of it the same flesh, but there is one of men, and another flesh of cattle, and another flesh of fowl, and another of fishes.
40 And there are heavenly bodies and earthly bodies, but the glory of the heavenly is of one type and that of the earthly is other: 41 one glory of the sun and another glory of the moon and another glory of the stars, for star differs from star in glory.
42 So too the resurrection of the dead: it is sowed in dissolution, it rises in imperishability; 43 it is sowed in ignominy, it rises in glory; it is sowed in weakness, it rises in power; 44 it is sowed an animal body, it rises a spiritual body.
If there is an animal body there is a spiritual too.
45 It is written so too, the first man Adam "became a living soul "; the last Adam, a life-giving spirit.
46 But there is not first the spiritual, but the animal, then the spiritual.
47 The first man was out of the earth, a figure of clay; the second man, out of heaven.
48 Such as the figure of clay, such also are those who are of clay, and such as the heavenly one, such also are those who are heavenly; 49 and as we have worn the likeness of the figure of clay, let us wear the likeness of the heavenly one also.
50 But this I do say, brothers, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the Reign of God, nor does dissolution inherit imperishability.
51 Here I tell you a secret: we shall not all go to our rest, but we shall all be changed in an instant, 52 in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet; for the trumpet will sound, and the dead will rise imperishable, and we shall be changed.
53 For this that is perishable has to dress itself in imperishability, and this that is mortal to dress itself in immortality.
54 But when this that is mortal does dress itself in immortality, then the words that are written will come true, 55 "Death has been swallowed up in victory. "
Where is your victory, death? where is your sting, death? 56 But the sting of death is sin. And the power of sin is the law.
57 And thanks be to God who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
58 Consequently, dear brothers, be firm in your footing, not easy to knock about, always abundant in work for the Lord, knowing that your labor does not come to nothing in the Lord.
16:1-24
16 And as to the collection for the members of the church, do the same as I directed the churches of Macedonia: 2 the first day of every week let each of you lay by to accumulate whatever he is prospered to, in order that when I come there may not be taking up of collections then.
3 And when I arrive, whomever you approve I will send with letters to take your kindness to Jerusalem; 4 and if it is worth while for me to go too, they shall go with me.
5 But I will come to you when I have been through Macedonia; for I am going through Macedonia, 6 but with you I shall maybe stay a while or over the winter, in order that you may give me a send-off wherever I may be going.
7 For I do not want to pay you a passing visit now; for I hope to stay with you some time, if the Lord permits.
8 But I shall stay in Ephesus till Pentecost; 9 for a great door for effective work has been opened to me, and there are many opponents.
10 But if Timothy comes, see to it that he is free from fear among you; for he is working at the Lord’s work the same as I am, 11 so let nobody scorn him, but start him on his way in peace to come to me, for I am expecting him with the brothers.
12 But as to Brother Apollos, I strongly urged him to come to you with the brothers, and it positively was not willed that he should come now, but he will when he gets a chance.
13 Keep awake, stand firm in the faith, be manly, take on strength.
14 Let everything you are concerned in be done in love.
15 But I urge you, brothers, you know Stephanas’s family, how it was the first to come in in Achaea and they charged themselves with service to God’s people, 16 that you too put yourselves at the disposal of folks like that and of everybody who cooperates and does the hard work.
17 And I am glad of the arrival of Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus because these filled out the shortage of you; 18 for they set my spirit at rest, and yours too.
So recognize folks like that.
19 The churches of Asia send you greetings.
Aquila and Prisca, with the meeting at their home, send you many greetings in the Lord.
20 All the brothers send you greetings.
Give my greetings to each other with a holy kiss.
21 Greeting with my own hand from me, Paul.
22 If anyone does not love the Lord, let him be for God’s destruction.
Maran atha. 23 The grace of the Lord Jesus be with you.
24 My love is with you all in Christ Jesus.
2 Corinthians
1:1-24
1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through God’s will, and Brother Timothy, to God’s church at Corinth with all the people of God in all Achaea; 2 grace to you, and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
3 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of compassion and God of all encouragement, 4 who encourages us upon all our distress so that we may be able to encourage those who are in any distress with the encouragement that is given to us ourselves by God, 5 because as the Christ’s sufferings are coming plentifully to us, so through the Christ our encouragement too comes in plentiful measure.
6 And be it that we are distressed, this is for your encouragement and salvation; or be it that we are encouraged, this is for your encouragement, which takes effect in the steadfast endurance of the same sufferings that we too undergo, 7 and our hope is firm for you, knowing as we do that as you are included in the sufferings, so too you are included in the encouragement.
8 For we do not want you to go without the knowledge, brothers, as to our distress in Asia, that we had an extraordinarily hard time, too hard for our powers, so that we had no prospect of even living, 9 but have had in our own selves the answer of death, in order that we may not be confident in ourselves but in God who raises the dead, 10 who delivered us out of that awful death and will do so; on whom we have set our hope.
And he will deliver us still, 11 while you cooperate helpfully on our behalf by petition, in order that from many faces thanks for the favor bestowed on us may be given through many on our behalf.
12 For this is our boast, the testimony of our conscience that it was in God’s holiness and candor, not in fleshly wisdom but in the grace of God, that we lived the life we did in the world; and very specially in relation to you.
13 For we do not write anything else to you but what you read or even recognize, and we hope will recognize to the full, 14 as you did in part recognize us to be your boast, the same as you are ours on the day of our Lord Jesus.
15 And in this assurance I wanted to come first to you, in order that you might have a second glad time, 16 and to go through to Macedonia by way of you and come from Macedonia to you again and have you see me off for Judea.
17 Wanting to do this, then, did I act capriciously? or is it in the way of flesh that I plan what I plan, so that with me there should be "O yes " and "O no "? 18 But, as God is faithful, our words to you are not yes-and-no.
19 For God’s Son Jesus Christ, who was proclaimed among you through us, Silvanus and Timothy and me, has not shown himself a yes-and-no, but in him there has been a Yes.
20 For in him is the Yes to as many promises of God as there are; for which reason through him also comes the Amen for glory to God through us.
21 And the one who brings us with you into a settled position in Christ and has anointed us is God, 22 the same who sealed us and gave us the Spirit in our hearts as earnest-money.
23 But I call God as witness against my own self that it was out of consideration for you I broke off coming to Corinth.
24 Not that we have any control over your faith, but we are cooperators in your joy; for it is by faith you stand.
2:1-17
2 But I made this resolution, not to come to you with an annoyance again.
2 For if I annoy you, then who is it that gladdens me but the one who is annoyed by me? 3 And I wrote that very thing in order that I might not, when I come, have annoyance from those over whom I ought to be rejoicing, being confident of you all that my joy is that of all of you.
4 For in much distress and heartache I wrote to you with many tears, not in order that you might be annoyed but in order that you might know the love I specially feel toward you.
5 And if anyone has caused an annoyance he has caused it not to me but in part, not to come down too hard, to all of you.
6 For such a one this rebuke by the majority is sufficient; 7 so that on the contrary you should rather be condoning and encouraging, for fear such a one should be crushed with excessive grief.
8 For which reason I urge you to take the line of love toward him; 9 for this was what I wrote for, in order to ascertain your quality, whether you are obedient on all points.
10 But to him to whom you condone anything, so do I for what I have condoned, if anything I have, has been on your account before Christ’s face, 11 in order that we may not be overreached by Satan; for we are not unacquainted with his contrivances.
12 But when I came to Troas to preach Christ’s gospel, and had a door opened for me in the Lord, 13 I did not have any relief for my spirit owing to my not finding my brother Titus, but bade them farewell and went out to Macedonia.
14 But thanks be to God who is always leading us about in his triumph and through us diffusing in every place the odor of the knowledge of him, 15 because we are Christ’s genial scent to God among those who are being saved and among those who are being lost 16 to these an odor from death, to death, but to those an odor from life, to life.
And for this who is adequate? 17 For we are not like so many, peddling God’s word for a living; it is as in honor bound, it is as from God, in God’s presence, in Christ, that we speak.
3:1-18
3 Are we beginning to recommend ourselves again? or do we want, as some folks do, letters of commendation to you or from you? 2 You are our letter, inscribed on our hearts, known and read by all men, 3 manifested to be a letter of Christ’s delivered by us, inscribed not in ink but in Spirit of the living God, not on tablets of stone but on heart-tablets of flesh.
4 But we have such assurance through the Christ toward God, 5 not that we are adequate of ourselves to count anything as from ourselves, but our adequacy is from God, 6 the same who made us adequate as servitors of a new covenant not of letter but of spirit; for the letter kills but the spirit brings to life.
7 And if the service of death, in letters, imprinted in stones, came in glory so that the sons of Israel could not fix their eyes on Moses’s face because of that glory of his face which was being superseded, 8 how shall the service of the Spirit not be more greatly in glory? 9 For if the service of condemnation is glory, much more surpassing in glory is the service of righteousness; 10 for the glorified is even gloryless in this aspect, on account of the glory that outdoes it.
11 For if what is superseded comes in glory, much more does what remains stand in glory.
12 So, having such a hope, we practice great frankness, 13 and do not do as Moses did when he put a veil over his face so that the sons of Israel should not set eyes on the end of what was being superseded; 14 but their senses became callous, for to this very day the same veil remains over the reading of the old covenant, not thrown back because it is superseded in Christ, 15 but to this day when Moses is read a veil lies over their heart.
16 But when he returns to the Lord the veil is taken off.
17 And the Lord is the Spirit; and where the Lord’s Spirit is, freedom is.
18 But we all of us, viewing the reflection of the Lord’s glory with face freed from its veil, are transfigured into the same likeness, from glory into glory, as should be the case from the Lord’s Spirit.
4:1-18
4 For this reason, having this service to perform as mercy was granted to us, we do not give up trying, 2 but have renounced the concealments of shame, not walking in trickery nor adulterating God’s word, but by giving publicity to the truth commending ourselves to every human conscience before God.
3 And if our gospel be veiled, it is veiled in the case of those who are being lost, 4 in whose case the god of this world has blinded unbelievers’ senses so that they should not eye the refulgence of the gospel of the glory of the Christ, who is image of God.
5 For we are not preaching ourselves, but Jesus Christ as Lord and ourselves servants to you on Jesus’s account, 6 because it was God, he who said "Light shall shine out of darkness, " that shone in our hearts to produce the refulgence of the knowledge of God’s glory in the face of Christ.
7 But we have this treasure in earthen jars, in order that the surpassing power may be God’s and not out of us: 8 every way hard pressed but not cornered, perplexed but not baffled, 9 persecuted but not deserted, felled but not ended, 10 always carrying about in our body Jesus’s deadness in order that Jesus’s life too may be made visible in our body.
11 For we who are alive are all the time being sent to death on Jesus’s account, in order that Jesus’s life too may be made visible in our mortal flesh, 12 so that death is at work in us but life in you.
13 And, having the same spirit of faith, in accordance with the written words "I believed, for that reason I spoke, " we too believe and it is for that reason we speak, 14 knowing that he who raised Jesus will raise us too with Jesus and present us together with you.
15 For everything is on your account, in order that the grace, growing vaster by the greater number, may make thanksgiving the more abundant to the glory of God.
16 Wherefore we do not give up trying, but though our outer man be perishing our inner is renewed day by day, 17 for the light pressure of our present distress is producing for us in unparalleled richness an unequaled weight of eternal glory; 18 while we look not to the seen but to the unseen, for what is seen is temporary but what is unseen is eternal.
5 For we know that if our earthly housing in the tent is pulled down we have a building that comes from God, an eternal unmanufactured house, in the heavens.
2 For this is what we groan about, longing to be clothed with the overgarment of our habitation from heaven, 3 if we are to have put it on and not be found naked 4 for we who are in the tent are weighed down and groan over our wish not to be stripped but to be clothed with an overgarment in order that mortality may be engulfed by life.
5 And the one that framed us to this very end was God, he who gave us the Spirit as earnest-money.
6 So, being always ready for anything, and knowing that while at home in the body we are abroad from the Lord 7 for we are walking by faith, not by a sight, 8 but we are ready for anything and willing, more willing, to be abroad from the body and at home with the Lord; 9 for this reason we make it our ambition too, whether at home or abroad, to be pleasing to him.
10 For we all have to come out to the bar of the Christ, each to get the payment for what he has done with his body, be it a good thing or a bad thing.
11 So, knowing the fear of the Lord, we are persuading men but are displayed in our true colors to God, and, I hope, in your consciences too.
12 We are not recommending ourselves to you again, but giving you material for boasting about us, in order that you may have something to say to those who boast of what they have to show and not of what is in them.
13 For if we are out of our senses it looks toward God, and if we are of sound mind it looks toward you.
14 For Christ’s love puts a pressure on us, our conclusion being that one died for all, hence all died, 15 and he died for all in order that those who are alive may no longer be alive looking toward themselves but toward the one who died and rose for them, 16 so that we, from now on, do not know anybody in the way of flesh.
Even though we have known Christ in the way of flesh, yet now we no longer do.
17 So that if one is in Christ it is a new creation, what originally existed is bygone, here have new things come into existence.
18 But everything is from God, who reconciled us to himself through Christ and gave us the errand of communicating the reconciliation, 19 how God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not counting their offenses against them, and consigning to us the word of the reconciliation.
20 So we come as ambassadors for Christ, as if it were God appealing to you by us; speaking for Christ we beg you, be reconciled to God.
21 Him who had not known sin he made into sin for us in order that we may become righteousness of God’s in him.
6:1-18
6 And in cooperation too we appeal to you not to give God’s grace such a reception as will make it amount to nothing; 2 for he says "At a time of acceptance I listened to you and on a day of salvation I helped you. "
Here is the time of acceptance now, here is the day of salvation now.
3 And we do not give anything for people to object to in any case, in order that the business we are on may not be found fault with, 4 but in every case are commending ourselves as agents of God, in holding out through many hard things, in distresses, in necessities, in tight pinches, 5 in beatings, in imprisonments, in mobbings, in hard work, in sleepless nights, in foodless days, 6 in integrity, in knowledge, in patience, in kindness, in Holy Spirit, in unfeigned love, 7 in words of truth, in God’s power, by the right-hand and left-hand armament of righteousness; 8 through glory and dishonor, through denunciation and commendation; as deceivers and truthful, 9 as unknown and noted, as dying and here we are alive, as punished for discipline and not put to death, 10 as grieving but always glad, as poor but enriching many, as not having anything but in possession of everything.
11 Our mouth is open to you, Corinthians, our heart is expanded.
12 You are not narrowed down in us but narrowed down in your own sympathies.
13 But in due requital, I say as speaking to children of mine, be expanded yourselves.
14 Do not be in incongruous yoking with unbelievers; for what have righteousness and wickedness in common? or what solidarity has light with darkness? 15 and what agreement between Christ and Belial is there? or what does a believer share with an unbeliever? 16 and what unity is there between a temple of God and idols? for we are a temple of the living God, as God said "I will live among them and walk among them, and will be their God and they shall be my people; 17 wherefore come out from their midst and separate yourselves, says the Lord, and do not touch an unclean thing, 18 and I will take you in and be father to you, and you shall be sons and daughters to me, says the Lord Almighty. "
7:1-16
7 So, dear friends, having these promises, let us cleanse ourselves from every defilement of flesh and spirit, working out holiness in the fear of God.
2 Find room for us; we did not wrong anybody, wreck anybody, overreach anybody.
3 I am not saying it by way of condemnation; for I have said before that you are in our hearts to live and die with us.
4 I have great confidence in speaking to you, great boasts on your account; I am filled full of encouragement, I have superabundant gladness with all our distress 5 for when we came to Macedonia our human nature had no relief; but in distress at every point outwardly fights, inwardly fears 6 but he who encourages those that are brought low, God, encouraged us with Titus’s arrival, 7 and not only his arrival but also the encouragement he had over you as he reported to us your longing, your lamenting, your jealousy for me, so that I had more of gladness; 8 because if I did grieve you in my letter, I do not regret it; if I did regret it (I see that that letter did, if only momentarily, grieve you) 9 I am glad now, not that you were grieved but that you were grieved into repentance.
For you were grieved in God’s way, in order that you might not be in any respect the worse off by us; 10 for grief that is felt in God’s way causes repentance into salvation, which there is no regretting, but the world’s grief produces death.
11 For look what earnestness, nay, words of self-defense, nay, indignation, nay, fear, nay, longing, nay, jealousy, nay, castigation! every way you kept your skirts clean in the matter.
12 So then if I did write to you it was not on account of the one who did the wrong nor of the one who was wronged, but for the sake of having your earnestness on our behalf made apparent to yourselves before God.
13 For this reason we have felt encouraged; and along with our encouragement we were all the gladder at Titus’s gladness because his spirit has been set at rest by all of you, 14 because if I have made any boast to him about you I was not put to shame, but as we told you everything truthfully, so too our boasting before Titus proved true.
15 And his sympathies are most pronounced toward you as he remembers the obedience of all of you, how you received him with fear and trembling.
16 I am glad to say that on every score I am in good spirits as regards you.
8:1-24
8 But let us make you acquainted, brothers, with God’s grace that has been given among the churches of Macedonia, 2 that under a great test of distress the plentifulness of their joy and their deep poverty became a plentiful source for the wealth of their liberality, 3 because to the extent of their power, I can testify, and beyond it, 4 they gave voluntarily, imploring us with strong appeals for the favor and the participation in the service to God’s people 5 and not as we had hoped, but giving themselves first to the Lord, and to us by God’s will, 6 so that we invited Titus, as he had made the first start, so too to bring to completion in you this grace too.
7 But as you are plentiful in everything, faith and the gift of speech and knowledge and all earnestness and love on our part toward you, try to be also plentiful in this grace.
8 I do not say it in the way of an order, but to get proof, through the earnestness of others, of the genuineness of your love too 9 for you know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, how on your account he became poor when he was rich, in order that you might become rich by his poverty 10 and as this is what I am doing I offer an opinion; for this will be good for you, who made the first start last year not only in doing but also in wanting to.
11 But now bring to completion the doing too, so that to the heartiness of wanting to there may correspond the completion that comes from having the wherewithal; 12 for if the hearty readiness is there it is acceptable on the basis of what one has, not of what he does not have.
13 For the idea is not that others are to get an easy time, you a hard one, 14 but to have it on an equality, your surplus coming in just now for their shortage in order that their surplus may also come in for your shortage, so that there may be equality, 15 as it is written "The one who had taken more had no surplus and the one who had taken less had no shortage. "
16 But thanks be to God who is putting into Titus’s heart the same earnestness on your behalf, 17 because he has accepted the invitation and, so earnest he was, has gone off to you on his own initiative.
18 And we sent with him the brother whose praise in the preaching of the gospel runs through all the churches, 19 and, besides, who has with a view to the glory of the Lord himself and our hearty preference been elected by the churches as our fellow-traveler in the matter of this grace that is being administered by us, 20 to avoid having anybody find fault with us in the matter of this bounty that is being administered by us; 21 for we are keeping in mind what is going to look well not only before the Lord but also before men.
22 And we sent with them our brother whom we have many times found by many evidences to be energetic, but now much more energetic by the confidence he has in you.
23 As to Titus, he is our comrade and co-worker for you; our brothers, they are church delegates, glory of Christ.
24 So when you give the demonstration of your love and of our boast about you to them, it is in presence of the churches.
9:1-15
9 For about the service to God’s people it is superfluous for me to write to you, 2 for I know your heartiness, as to which I am boasting of you to the Macedonians that Achaea has been prepared ever since last year, and rivalry with you has stirred up the greater part of them.
3 But I send the brothers in order that our boast of you may not be made an empty one in this respect; in order that you may, as I said, be prepared, 4 for fear that if Macedonians should come with me and find you unprepared we (not to say you) should be shamed about this pledge; 5 so I thought it necessary to request the brothers to go to you in advance and get this already promised bounty of yours into shape in advance to be ready in that way, as a bounty and not as a grab.
6 But there is this, he who sows sparingly will also reap sparingly, and he who sows bountifully will also reap bountifully.
7 Each as he has his mind made up, not in annoyance nor under compulsion, for God "loves a cheerful giver. " 8 And God is powerful to make all grace superabound toward you, in order that you, always having in every respect all sufficiency for yourselves, may superabound to every good work 9 (as it is written "He scattered, gave to the poor, his sainthood lasts forever "; 10 and he who furnishes seed for the sower and bread for eating will furnish your sowings, and that abundantly, and make the produce of your right-doing grow), 11 enriched with everything for all liberality, which through you produces thanksgiving to God 12 because the dispensing of this service not only supplements the shortages of God’s people but also through many thanksgivings superabounds to God; glorifying God, 13 through the evidence of this ministration, with the good discipline of your professed allegiance to the gospel of the Christ, and the generousness of your solidarity to them and to everybody, 14 and their prayers for you as they yearn over you because of God’s surpassing grace upon you.
15 Thanks be to God for his indescribable gift.
10:1-18
10 And I Paul myself urge you by the Christ’s gentleness and reasonableness, I who face to face am a nobody among you, but at a distance am stouthearted toward you 2 but I beg that I may not at close quarters be stout with that assurance with which I reckon on venturing against some people, those who reckon us as walking in the way of flesh.
3 For, while we walk in flesh, we do not carry on our campaign in the way of flesh; 4 for the weapons of our campaigning are not fleshly but divinely powerful for the demolishing of fortified positions, 5 demolishing argumentations and every high structure raised against the knowledge of God and taking every idea prisoner into obedience to the Christ, 6 and all ready to deal out penalties for every noncompliance when your obedience has come to the full.
7 Look at what you see before your faces.
If somebody feels confident that he belongs to Christ, let him think this over again to himself, that we belong to Christ just the same as he does.
8 For if I boast more or less freely about our authority, which the Lord gave for building you up and not for demolishing you, I shall not be shamed; 9 not to speak as if I were sort of scaring you by my letters, 10 because "the letters, " he says, "are impressive and strong, but the personal presence is weak and the talk does not amount to anything. " 11 Let such a man think this over, that what we are like in talk by letters while absent is just what we are like in action when present.
12 For we do not venture to put ourselves in the same class with, or compare ourselves with, some of those who are recommending themselves; but they, measuring themselves by themselves and comparing themselves with themselves, do not see what is what.
13 But we will not boast beyond the range of measurement, but suitably to the measurement of the yardstick of the measure God gave us, to come clear through to you.
14 For we are not overstretching ourselves, as we might be if we were not coming through to you; for we did get clear through to you in preaching the Christ’s gospel; 15 not boasting out of measure on the basis of other people’s hard work, but having a hope that as your faith grows we may be greatened in you, conformably to our yardstick, to a further extension, 16 to preach the gospel in the places out beyond you, not in somebody else’s yard to brag of ready-made progress.
17 But "let him who boasts boast of the Lord. " 18 For it is not he who recommends himself that rates as up to the standard, but he whom the Lord recommends.
11:1-33
11 I wish you would put up with a little bit of silliness from me; yes, do put up with me.
2 For I am jealous over you, feeling God’s jealousy.
For I betrothed you to one husband, to present you to Christ a pure virgin; 3 and I am afraid lest, as the snake befooled Eve by his trickery, your sentiments should be seduced away from Christ-directed single-mindedness and purity.
4 For if the one who comes preaches another Jesus whom we did not preach, or you get a different spirit that you did not get, or a different gospel that you did not receive, you are quite right in putting up with him.
5 For I figure that I have in no respect fallen behind the superlative apostles.
6 And even if I am uneducated in talk I am not in knowledge, but in everything we have made it manifest by everything on all occasions among you.
7 Or did I commit a sin by lowering myself to have you upraised, in that I preached God’s gospel to you gratis? 8 I looted other churches, taking pay for service to you; 9 and when I was there with you and was in want I did not squeeze anybody, for the brothers came from Macedonia and supplemented my shortage; and in everything I kept myself from being a load on you, and will do so.
10 It is gospel truth what I am telling you, I am not going to have this boast blocked against me in the territories of Achaea.
11 Why? because I do not love you?
God knows.
12 But what I am doing and will do is in order to cut away the foothold of those who desire a foothold to start from, in order that in the point they boast of they may be found to be the same as we are.
13 For men of that sort are false apostles, tricky workmen, reshaping themselves into apostles of Christ’s 14 and no wonder, for Satan himself reshapes himself into an angel of light, 15 so it is no great thing if his agents too reshape themselves like agents of righteousness; their end will be suitable to their deeds.
16 I say again, do not any of you think I am silly.
But if you do, at least give me a silly man’s hearing so that I too may do a little boasting.
17 What I am saying I am not saying along the Lord’s line but, so to speak, in silliness, in this insistence on boasting.
18 Since many are boasting along the line of flesh, so will I. 19 For you do like to put up with silly people, you being so sensible; 20 for you put up with it if one enslaves you, if one eats you out of house and home, if one takes things, if one holds his head high, if one strikes you in the face.
21 I am speaking in terms of disrespect as if the point were that we had been weak.
But as to what anybody presumes on, I say in silliness, so do I presume.
22 They are Hebrews so am I. They are Israelites so am I. They are descendants of Abraham so am I. 23 They are Christ’s messengers I am out of my senses to say it, more so I, with an uncommon amount of hard work, an uncommon number of imprisonments, a record-breaking number of beatings, a great number of deaths.
24 At Jews’ hands I five times received forty stripes lacking one; 25 three times I was beaten with Roman rods; once I was stoned; three times I was shipwrecked, I have spent a day and a night in the deep; 26 often on the move, in dangers by rivers, dangers by robbers, dangers from those of my blood, dangers from foreigners, dangers in the city, dangers in the wilderness, dangers on the sea, dangers among pretended brothers, 27 in toil and drudgery, with many a sleepless night, with hunger and thirst, many times without anything to eat, with cold and nakedness.
28 Apart from the things outside me, there is what takes up my mind day after day, anxiety about all the churches.
29 Who is sick and I am not sick? who trips up and my face does not burn? 30 If I have to boast I will boast of things connected with my weakness.
31 The Lord Jesus Christ’s God and Father knows, he who is blessed forever, that I am not lying: 32 at Damascus King Harithath’s sheik had a force in the city of the Damascenes to arrest me, 33 and I was let down in a basket through the wall by a window and escaped his hands.
12 I have to boast; it is not good for me, but I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord.
2 I know of a man in Christ fourteen years ago, whether in body I do not know or whether outside the body I do not know, God knows, of that person’s being snatched up to the third heaven; 3 and I know that man (whether in the body or apart from the body I do not know, God knows) 4 to have been snatched up into Paradise and heard unutterable words which it is not permissible for a man to speak.
5 As to that person I will boast, but as to myself I will do no boasting except of my weaknesses.
6 For if I do choose to boast I shall not be silly, for I shall be speaking the truth; but I am holding back for fear somebody should rate me above what he sees me to be or hears from me 7 by the very extraordinariness of the revelations.
For which reason, in order that I may not feel too lofty, I was given a thorn for my flesh, a messenger of Satan’s to bang me about in order that I may not feel too lofty.
8 As to this I appealed to the Lord three times to have it leave me; 9 and he has said to me "My grace suffices you; for power comes to its completion in weakness. "
Most gladly, then, will I boast rather of weaknesses, in order that the Christ’s power may settle on me.
10 For which reason I welcome weaknesses brutal treatment, necessities, persecutions, and tight pinches for Christ; for when I am weak, then I am powerful.
11 I have become silly; you drove me to it.
For I ought to be getting recommendations from you.
For there is nothing in which I have fallen behind the superlative apostles, even if I do not amount to anything.
12 The tokens of the apostle have been produced among you with all perseverance, by tokens and wonders and miracles.
13 For what point is there in which you were left worse off than the rest of the churches, except that I did not personally squeeze you? excuse me for this unfairness.
14 This makes the third time now that I have been ready to come to you, and I will not squeeze you, for I am not after what is yours but after you.
For the children ought not to be laying by for the parents, but the parents for the children.
15 And I will most gladly spend and be expended for your souls.
If I specially love you am I less loved? 16 But say I did not burden you myself, but, foxy that I am, I caught you by trickery.
17 Of those that I have sent to you has there been anyone through whom I took an advantage of you? 18 I invited Titus to go, and I sent the brother with him; did Titus take any advantage of you? did we not walk by the same spirit? in the same steps?
19 You have been thinking all along that it was to you we were making our defense; it is before God that we have been speaking in Christ.
But everything, dear friends, has been for your upbuilding; 20 for I have been afraid that possibly when I come I may find you not such as I want to, and have you find me such as you do not want to; that possibly quarreling, jealousy, fits of passions, schemes of church politics, detractions, whisperings, inflated airs, disorders 21 that when I come again God is going to humble me in your presence and I am to mourn over great numbers of those who had previously sinned and have not repented over the nastiness and unchastity and indecency they have practiced.
13 This makes the third time I am coming to you, "Every point shall be established at the mouths of two witnesses, and of three. " 2 I have said beforehand, and am saying beforehand, the same now that I am away as when I was there the second time, that if I come again I will not spare, 3 since you are looking for evidence of the genuineness of the Christ who speaks in me 4 who is not weak toward you, but is powerful in you; for he was crucified as a result of weakness, but he is alive as a result of God’s power; for we too are weak in him but shall live with him as a result of God’s power toward you.
5 Make the test of yourselves, if you are in the faith; see about your own genuineness.
Or do you not recognize in your own case that Jesus Christ is in you? unless you are counterfeit, 6 but I hope you will find that we are not counterfeits.
7 But we pray to God that you may not do anything bad, not in order that we may show up as genuine but that you may be doing what is good and we be as if we were counterfeits; 8 for we cannot do anything against the truth, but for the truth.
9 For we are glad when we are weak but you are powerful; this is the very thing we are praying for, your advance to soundness.
10 That is why I write this while I am away, so that when I am there I may not act rigorously under the authority which the Lord gave me for building up and not for demolishing.
11 For the rest, brothers, be joyous, sound, cheerful, unanimous, peaceful, and the God of love and peace will be with you.
12 Give my greetings to each other with a holy kiss.
13 All God’s people send you greetings.
14 The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with you all.
Galatians
1 Paul, an apostle not from men nor through a man but through Jesus Christ and God the Father who raised him from the dead, 2 and all the brothers who are with me, to the churches of Galatia: 3 Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ 4 who gave himself for our sins in order to take us out of the present vicious world in accordance with the will of our God and Father, 5 to whom be glory world without end; amen!
6 I wonder that you are so quickly shifting from the Christ who called you in grace to another gospel, 7 which is not another one, unless there are some who are disturbing you and wanting to turn the gospel of the Christ another way.
8 But even if we, or if an angel from heaven, preaches to you a gospel inconsistent with the gospel we preached, let him be for God’s destruction.
9 As we have said before, now too I say again, if anyone preaches to you a gospel inconsistent with what you did have given to you, let him be for God’s destruction.
10 For am I now persuading men or God? or am I aiming to please men?
If I were still pleasing men I should not be Christ’s property.
11 And I give you notice, brothers, as to the gospel preached by me that it is not along human lines; 12 for I did not even take it over nor receive teaching from a man, but through a revelation of Jesus Christ.
13 For you have heard about my life back in my Jewish days, that I was extraordinarily active in persecuting and ravaging God’s church, 14 and went further in Jewishness than a good many in my race who were of my age, being a very special zealot for the traditions I had from my fathers.
15 But when he who had set me apart before I was born and had called me by his grace was pleased 16 to reveal his Son in me in order that I might preach his gospel among the nations, at once I did not consult flesh and blood 17 nor go up to Jerusalem to those who had been apostles before me but went off into Arabia, and came back again to Damascus.
18 Then, after three years, I went up to Jerusalem to look up Cephas, and stayed at his house a fortnight, 19 but did not see another of the apostles, except the Lord’s brother James.
20 And in what I am writing to you God knows I am not lying.
21 Then I came into the Syrian and Cilician neighborhood.
22 But I was unknown by face to the churches of Christ in Judea; 23 but they only heard "He who once persecuted us is now preaching the gospel of the faith he used to ravage, " 24 and glorified God over me.
2:1-21
2 Then, after fourteen years, I went up to Jerusalem again with Barnabas, taking Titus along too.
2 And I went up in accordance with a revelation; and I laid before them the gospel I am proclaiming among the nations, but privately before those who had reputations, for fear that I should be or had been running a bootless course; 3 but there was no requirement that even Titus who was with me, being a Greek, should be circumcised.
4 But because of the intrusive false brothers who had intruded themselves to spy on our liberty that we have in Christ Jesus, in order to enslave us, 5 to whom we did not for a moment give way in submission, in order that the truth of the gospel might remain with you.
6 But from those who had the reputation of being something (what they were makes no difference to me; God does not defer to a man’s personality) for those who had reputations propounded nothing to me, 7 but on the contrary, as they saw that I had been entrusted with the gospel message for the uncircumcised as Peter had with that for the circumcised, 8 for he who had inspired Peter to the apostleship for the circumcised had inspired me too to the nations, 9 and finding the grace that had been given to me, James and Cephas and John, those who had the reputation of being pillars, shook hands with Barnabas and me on a partnership, we to address ourselves to the nations and they to the circumcised; 10 only we were to remember the poor, which is just what I have made a point of doing.
11 But when Cephas came to Antioch I opposed him face to face because he was recognizably in the wrong; 12 for before a certain person came from James he ate together with the foreigners, but when he came he flinched and separated himself, being afraid of the circumcised party, 13 and the rest of the Jews played the hypocrite together with him, so that even Barnabas was carried along with their hypocrisy; 14 but when I saw that they were not taking a straight line by the truth of the gospel, I said to Cephas before everybody "If you, when you are a Jew, are living in foreign fashion and not in Jewish, how is it you are forcing the foreigners to go Jewish? 15 We, as by natural birth Jews and not sinful foreigners, 16 but knowing that a man is not justified as the outcome of deeds in observance of the law but only through faith in Jesus Christ, even we put our faith in Jesus Christ in order that we might be justified as the outcome of faith in Christ and not of deeds under the law, because out of the deeds under the law no mortal will be justified.
17 But if in seeking to be justified in Christ we ourselves have been found sinful too, then Christ is an auxiliary to sin! away with the thought! 18 For if I build up again what I did break down, I certify myself a transgressor.
19 As for me, through the law I died to the law in order that I might be alive to God.
20 I have been crucified with Christ; and no longer I am alive, but Christ is alive in me; and insofar as I am now alive in flesh I am alive in faith on the Son of God who loved me and gave himself up for me.
21 I do not disregard God’s grace. For if there is righteousness through the law, then Christ died superfluously. "
3:1-29
3 You stupid Galatians, who hypnotized you, you who had had it advertised before your eyes that Jesus Christ was crucified? 2 I want to find out this one thing from you: was it as the outcome of deeds in observance of the law that you received the Spirit or was it as the outcome of listening in faith? 3 Are you so stupid as this? when you began by Spirit are you now finishing by flesh? 4 Did you undergo so much for nothing? if for nothing it was! 5 Does he who furnishes the Spirit to you, then, and who works miracles among you, do it as the outcome of deeds in observance of the law or as the outcome of listening in faith? 6 As Abraham "believed God, and it was counted as righteousness for him. " 7 Know, then, that it is the men of faith who are sons of Abraham.
8 And the text, foreseeing that God is justifying the nations as the outcome of faith, gave Abraham the anticipatory gospel message "In you all the nations shall be blessed, " 9 so that the men of faith are blessed with believing Abraham.
10 For as many as are on the basis of deeds in observance of the law are under a curse; for it says "Accursed is everyone who does not persist in everything written in the book of the law to live up to it. " 11 And that in the law nobody is justified in God’s presence is obvious, because "the righteous man shall have life by virtue of faith " 12 and the law is not by virtue of faith but "he who practices them shall have life by them. " 13 Christ bought us off from the curse of the law, becoming a curse for us (because it says "anyone hanging on wood is accursed "), 14 that in Jesus Christ Abraham’s blessing might be on the nations, that we might receive the promised gift of the Spirit through faith.
15 Brothers, I speak from a human point of view; it is the same with a human engagement: when it has been validated, nobody ignores it or adds new conditions to it.
16 But the promise was uttered to Abraham "and his seed " he does not say "and seeds " as referring to many, but, as referring to one, "and your seed, " who is Christ.
17 And this is what I am saying: when an engagement had been previously validated by God, the law that came into existence four hundred and thirty years later could not invalidate it so as to supersede the promise.
18 For if the inheritance is on the basis of a law it is no longer on the basis of a promise; but God has granted it to Abraham by a promise.
19 How about the law then?
It was added with a view to transgressions, until the Seed to whom the promise was made should come, and was prescribed through angels by the hand of an intermediary.
20 But an intermediary is not the intermediary of one. But God is one.
21 So is the law in antagonism to God’s promises? away with the thought!
For if there had been given a law that could bring life, righteousness would really be by the law; 22 but the text has shut up everything under sin in order that as the outcome of faith in Jesus Christ the fulfillment of the promise might be given to those who believe.
23 But before faith came we were kept in custody under the law, shut up to be ready for the faith that was going to be revealed, 24 so that the law has been our conductor to Christ in order that we might be justified on the basis of faith.
25 But now that faith has come we are no longer under a conductor.
26 For you are all sons of God through faith in Christ Jesus.
27 For all you who have been baptized to Christ have clothed yourselves with Christ; 28 there is no such thing as Jew or Greek, there is no such thing as slave or free, there is no such thing as male and female, for all of you are one in Christ Jesus.
29 And if you belong to Christ, then you are seed of Abraham, heirs by promise.
4:1-31
4 But, I am saying, for so long as the heir is an infant he is no different from a slave though he is master of everything, 2 but is under guardians and stewards until the date that the father sets; 3 in the same way we, when we were infants, were enslaved under the elementary things of the world.
4 But when the full time had elapsed God sent out his Son, born of a woman, born under the law, 5 to buy off those who were under the law, so that we might receive our adoption as sons.
6 And because you are sons God sent out his Son’s spirit into our hearts crying "Abba, " Father. 7 So that you are no longer a slave but a son, and if a son, an heir too through God.
8 But then, not knowing God, you were in slavery to those who in nature are not gods.
9 But now when you do know God, or rather are known by God, how is it you are turning back again to the weak and cheap elementary things, to which you want to be in slavery over again? 10 you watch days and months and dates and years.
11 I am afraid of you, that I may have done my hard work on you for nothing.
12 Become like me, because I myself am becoming like you, brothers, I beg you.
You did me no wrong; 13 but you know it was because of a physical infirmity that I preached the gospel to you in the first place; 14 and you were not provoked to scorn or disgust by the temptation to you in my bodily condition, but received me like an angel of God, like Jesus Christ.
15 What has become of your self-congratulation, then? for I am your witness that if it had been possible you would have dug out your own eyes and given them to me.
16 So that I have become your enemy by telling you the truth!
17 They are jealous of you, not in a good sense, but they want to shut you out in order that you may be jealous of them.
18 But it is a good thing to have people’s jealousy in a good cause at all times and not only while I am there with you, 19 my children, with whom I am in birth-pangs again till Christ takes shape in you.
20 But I wish I could be there with you now and change my tone, because I am at my wit’s end about you.
21 Tell me, you that want to be under the law, do you not hear the law? 22 For the text says Abraham had two sons, one by the slave-girl and one by the freewoman, 23 but the one by the slave-girl had been begotten in the way of flesh and the one by the freewoman through a promise: 24 which things are said allegorically; for these are two covenants, one from Mount Sinai, producing children for slavery, which is Hagar 25 (and Sinai is a mountain in Arabia); and it corresponds to the present Jerusalem, for that is in slavery with its children.
26 But the Jerusalem above is free, which is our mother; 27 for it says "Jubilate, barren woman who bore no children; break loose and shout, you that felt no birth-pangs; because the deserted mother’s children outnumber those of the husbanded mother. " 28 And you, brothers, like Isaac, are children of a promise; 29 but just as then the one born in the way of flesh persecuted the one born in the way of spirit, 30 so now but what does the text say?
"Turn out the slave-girl and her son, for the slave-girl’s son shall not inherit along with the freewoman’s! "
31 Wherefore, brothers, we are not children of a slave-girl but of the freewoman.
5:1-26
5 It was to freedom that Christ liberated us; so stand firm and do not be held in a yoke of slavery again.
2 Here, it is I, Paul, that am telling you: if you get circumcised, Christ will not do you any good at all.
3 And again I declare to every man who gets circumcised that he owes the performance of the whole of the law.
4 You are disengaged from Christ, you who are being justified by the law; you have dropped out of grace; 5 for we by the Spirit await on the basis of faith a hope of justification.
6 For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision has any effect, but faith active through love.
7 You were running finely; who interfered with you to keep you from obeying truth? 8 the pressure is not from the one who is calling you.
9 A little piece of yeast makes all the dough yeasty.
10 But I am confident of you in the Lord that you will not take any other attitude; but he who is disturbing you shall bear the sentence he gets, whoever he is.
11 But why am I, brothers, still being persecuted, if I am still preaching circumcision? then the difficulty of the cross is shelved.
12 It would be a good thing if those who are unsettling you would do something more to themselves than circumcision.
13 For you, brothers, were called on terms of liberty; only do not make liberty an opening for the flesh, but be in slavery to each other through love.
14 For all of the law is fulfilled in one proposition, to love one’s neighbor as one’s self. 15 But if you bite and eat each other, look out that you do not get used up by each other.
16 But I am saying, walk by the Spirit and you shall not fulfill the desire of flesh.
17 For the flesh feels desire against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; for these two are opposed to each other in order that you may not do whatever you wish.
18 But if you are led by the Spirit, you are not under the law.
19 And the activities of the flesh are plain, which are unchastity, nastiness, indecency, 20 idolatry, witchcraft, hatreds, quarreling, jealousy, fits of passion, schemes of church politics, factions, dissensions, 21 envying, getting drunk, wild parties, and things similar to these; as to which I forewarn you, just as I did, that those who do such things will not inherit the Reign of God.
22 But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faith, 23 meekness, self-mastery; against such things there is no law.
24 And those who belong to Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with its susceptibilities and desires.
25 If we are alive by the Spirit, let us guide ourselves by the Spirit; 26 let us not grow pretentious, challenging each other, envying each other.
6 Brothers, if a person does get swept into some offense, straighten him out, you spiritual ones, in the spirit of meekness, having an eye to yourself for fear you too should be tempted.
2 Carry each other’s burdens, and so you will fulfill Christ’s law.
3 For if one thinks he is something when he is nothing, he is deluding himself.
4 But let each test his own work, and then he will have his boast with regard to himself alone and not to the other man; 5 for each will be carrying his own pack.
6 But let him who receives instruction in the word share everything good with his instructor.
7 Make no mistake, there is no thumbing your nose at God; for a man will reap just the same that he sows, 8 because he who sows into his own flesh will reap out of the flesh decay, but who sows into the Spirit shall reap out of the Spirit eternal life.
9 And let us not give up doing what is good, for at the right time reap we shall if we do not weaken.
10 So then let us, as we have opportunity, practice good deeds toward everybody, and especially toward the members of our family of faith.
11 See in what large letters I am writing to you with my own hand.
12 It is such as want to make a fine appearance in flesh that are compelling you to get circumcised, only in order that for the Christ’s cross they may not be persecuted; 13 for those who get circumcised do not themselves keep the law either, but they want you to be circumcised in order that they may boast over your flesh.
14 But far be it from me to boast over anything but the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which I have the world crucified to me and myself to the world.
15 For neither circumcision nor uncircumcision amounts to anything, but only new creation; 16 and as many as shall guide themselves by this standard, peace be upon them, and mercy, and upon God’s Israel.
17 Hereafter let nobody make me trouble; for I carry Jesus’s brand on my body.
18 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirits, brothers; amen.
Ephesians
1:1-23
1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through God’s will, to God’s people at Ephesus, believers in Christ Jesus: 2 grace to you, and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
3 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly sphere in Christ, 4 as he chose us in him before the foundation of the world that we should be holy and unblemished before him, 5 foreordaining us in love to adoption through Jesus Christ into himself according to the pleasure of his will, 6 to the praise of the glory of his grace with which he graced us in the Loved One! 7 in whom we have redemption through his blood, the pardon of offenses as befits the wealth of his grace 8 which he has made to superabound toward us, 9 making known to us in all good sense and wisdom the secret of his will as was his pleasure which he planned to realize in him 10 for the arrangement of all that fills time, to sum up everything in the Christ, what is in the heavens and what is on earth;
11 In him in whom we received our allotment too, foreordained to it in accordance with the purpose of him who works in everything according to the planning of his will, 12 that we should be for the praise of his glory, we who had set our anticipatory hope on the Christ; 13 in whom you too, having heard the word of the truth, the gospel of your salvation, in whom having believed too, you were sealed with the holy Spirit of the promise, 14 which is the first installment of our inheritance, for redemption for preservation, to the praise of his glory.
15 Because of this I on my part, hearing of what there is among you of faith in the Lord Jesus and love toward all God’s people, 16 never cease to give thanks for you as I make mention of you in my prayers, 17 that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, may give you a spirit of wisdom and revelation in awareness of him, 18 your heart’s eyes lighted up so that you shall know what is the hope of his call, what the wealth of glory of his inheritance among his people, 19 and what the supreme greatness of his power toward us believers, the like of that exertion of the mightiness of his strength 20 which he has put forth in the case of the Christ, raising him from the dead and seating him at his right hand in the heavenly sphere, 21 up above every government and dominion and power and lordship and every name that is named not only in this world but also in the world to come; 22 and he subjected everything under his feet and gave him as head over everything to the church, 23 which is his body, the fullness of him who fills everything in everything.
2:1-22
2 And you, when you were dead by offenses and by your sins 2 in which you once took your way to suit the times of this world, as suits the ruler of the dominion of air, of the spirit that is now at work in the sons of disobedience; 3 among whom we too, all of us, once lived our life in the desires of our flesh, doing the things willed by the flesh and the mind, and were by nature objects of anger the same as the rest.
4 But God, being rich in pity, because of his great love with which he loved us 5 brought us to life together with the Christ when we were dead by offenses it is by grace you are saved 6 and raised us together with him and seated us together with him in the heavenly sphere, in Christ Jesus, 7 in order that in the ages that are coming on he might show the surpassing wealth of his grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus.
8 For it is by grace you are saved through faith; and not out of yourselves either God’s is the gift; 9 not on a basis of deeds, lest somebody should boast.
10 For we are his making, created in Christ Jesus with a view to good deeds which God made ready beforehand so that we might occupy ourselves in them.
11 For which reason be mindful that once upon a time you, the foreigners in flesh, you who are called "uncircumcision " by the so-called "circumcision, " artificial, in flesh, 12 that at that time, away from Christ, you were cut off by unrelation from citizenship in Israel and were strangers to the covenants of the promise, hopeless and godless in the world; 13 but now in Christ Jesus you who once were far off have by the Christ’s blood come to be nearby.
14 For he is our peace, he who made both one and broke away the fencing-off party-wall, 15 the enmity, in his flesh, superseding the law of commandments in decree form in order to create the two in himself into one new man, making peace, 16 and to reconcile both to God in one body through the cross, killing the enmity on it; 17 and he came bringing good news of peace to you who were far away and peace to those who were nearby, 18 because through him we both of us have our presentation to the Father in one Spirit.
19 So then you are not strangers in an immigrant status any longer, but you are fellow-citizens of God’s people and members of God’s family, 20 built in on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, the cornerstone being Christ Jesus himself, 21 in whom all the work of the building is being so fitted that it grows into a holy temple in the Lord; 22 in whom you too are being built together in the Spirit into a home of God.
3:1-21
3 On this account I, Paul, Christ Jesus’s man in prison for you foreigners 2 if you heard of the bestowal of that grace of God’s which was given me for you: 3 it was by way of revelation that the secret was made known to me, as I wrote in brief above, 4 by which as you read you can sense my insight into the secret of the Christ, 5 which in other generations was not made known to the sons of men as it has now been spiritually revealed to his holy apostles and prophets, 6 the nations’ being co-heirs and concorporate and co-sharers of the promise in Christ Jesus through the gospel, 7 of which I became an agent in consequence of the gift of that grace of God’s which was given me in accordance with the working of his power.
8 I, the least fit of all God’s people, was given this grace, to bring the nations the gospel of the Christ’s unfathomable richness 9 and to bring into the light what is the system followed with the secret that has from eternity been hidden in God, who created everything, 10 in order that God’s many-sided wisdom might now through the church be made known to the governments and dominions in the heavenly sphere 11 in accordance with the eternal purpose he framed in the Christ our Lord Jesus, 12 in whom we have boldness and the privilege of entering with assurance through faith in him; 13 for which reason I ask you not to give in at my distresses for you, which are your glory.
14 On this account I bend my knees to the Father 15 from whom every father’s family in heaven and on earth takes its name 16 that he may grant to you, in accordance with the richness of his glory, to be strengthened in the inward man with power through his Spirit; 17 to have Christ fix his home in your hearts through faith; with your roots and foundations set fast in love, 18 that you may be enabled to perceive with all God’s people what is the breadth and length and height and depth 19 and to know the Christ’s unknowable love, that you may be filled to all God’s fullness.
20 And to him who can do more than everything beyond the utmost limit of what we ask for or conceive of, in accordance with the power that is at work in us, 21 to him be glory in the church and in Christ Jesus to all the generations of endless time; amen.
4:1-32
4 So I, the prisoner in the Lord, urge you to walk in a fashion worthy of the call that was given you, 2 with all humility and meekness, patiently putting up with each other in love, 3 making a point of safeguarding the oneness of the Spirit in the tie of peace.
4 One body and one Spirit, as you were called in one hope too that belongs to your call; 5 one Lord, one faith, one baptism; 6 one God and Father of all, he who is over all and among all and in all.
7 But each one of us had grace given him in the measure of the Christ’s gift; 8 which is why it says "he went up on high, brought a train of captives, gave presents to men. " 9 And what does "went up " mean if not that he also came down to the lower parts, of the earth? 10 He who came down, he is the one also who went up clear above all the heavens so that he should fill everything; 11 and he gave some to be apostles and some to be prophets and some to be preachers of the gospel and some to be pastors and teachers 12 for the sound training of God’s people, for the work of service for the upbuilding of the Christ’s body, 13 until all of us attain to the oneness of the faith and of awareness of the Son of God, to a grown-up man to the measure of the adulthood of the fullness of the Christ, 14 in order that we may no longer be infants, tossed and driven about by every wind of doctrine in men’s jugglery of tricks governed by the devices of error, 15 but, telling truth in love, may every way grow up into him, him who is the head, Christ, 16 out of whom all the body, fitted together and conjoined by every joint which connects the supply, in accordance with the working of each individual part in measure, produces the growth of the body to its self-upbuilding in love.
17 So this I say and protest in the Lord, that you are no longer to go the same way as the heathen do in their fatuousness of mind, 18 darkened in their thinking as they are, cut off by unrelation from God’s life because of the ignorance they have in them because of their lumpish-heartedness men who, 19 having lost all sensitiveness, have given themselves up to indecency to work at every sort of foulness as a competitive business.
20 But it was not in that fashion that you learned the Christ; 21 not if you heard of him and were taught in him as is truth in Jesus, 22 that as regards your former way of life you are to throw off the old man who is going bad along the line of the desires he is fooled into, 23 and be renewed in the spirit of your mind 24 and put on the new man who along God’s line has been created in the righteousness and godliness of truth.
25 For which reason, laying aside falsehood, each speak truth with his neighbor, because we are organs of each other; 26 "be angry and do not sin, " let the sun not go down on your exasperation, 27 and do not give the Devil a chance; 28 let him who has been stealing no longer steal but rather labor, putting his hands to work at what is good, in order to have something he can share with the one who is in need; 29 let no foul talk go out of your mouths, but any that is good, tending to the required upbuilding, to impart grace to the hearers, 30 and do not grieve God’s Holy Spirit in which you have had the seal set on you to be ready for the day of redemption; 31 let all crossness and passionateness and anger and loud and abusive language be cleared away from you, with all viciousness, 32 and be kind to each other, good-hearted, mutually making allowances in the same way as God in Christ showed grace to you.
5:1-33
5 So be imitators of God like dear children, 2 and walk in love in the same way as the Christ loved you, and gave himself up for us as an offering and sacrifice of genial odor to God.
3 But let unchastity and any sort of uncleanness or grasping greed not be even named among you, as befits people of God’s; 4 and obscenity and foolery or ribaldry, which are not proper things; but rather, proper thankfulness.
5 For know this well, that any unchaste or unclean person or greedy grasper, which is the same as to say idolater, does not have an inheritance coming to him in the reign of Christ and God.
6 Let nobody deceive you with empty words; for it is on account of these things that God’s anger comes upon the sons of disobedience, 7 so do not be sharers in them.
8 For you were once darkness, but are now light in the Lord.
Walk as children of light 9 (for the fruit of the light is in every goodness and righteousness and truth), 10 studying what is pleasing to the Lord; 11 and do not be a party to the unfruitful doings of the darkness rather even expose their character.
12 For it is ugly even to mention the things that are done in hiding by them; 13 but everything when it has its character exposed comes into view by the light; for everything that comes into view is light; 14 which is why it says "Wake, you sleeper, and rise from the dead, and the Christ shall beam upon you. "
15 So look to it carefully how you walk, not as unwise but as wise, 16 making the best you can of the crisis, because the days are wicked.
17 For this reason do not be silly, but understand what the Lord’s will is.
18 And do not get stimulated with wine, which carries dissipation with it, but be filled by the Spirit, 19 talking together in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making music in your hearts to the Lord, 20 giving thanks always for everything in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to God the Father, 21 submissive to each other in the fear of Christ; 22 wives to their husbands as they are to the Lord, 23 because a husband is the wife’s head the same as the Christ is the church’s.
He is the savior of the body; 24 but as the church is submissive to the Christ, so let the wives also be to their husbands, in everything.
25 Husbands, love your wives, as the Christ in his case loved the church, and gave himself up for it 26 in order to hallow it, cleansing it by the bath of water with a word, 27 so that he might himself present the church to himself a glorious creature without a spot or a wrinkle or anything of the sort, but holy and flawless; 28 so ought husbands too to love their wives as they do their own bodies.
He who loves his wife is loving himself; 29 for nobody ever hated his own flesh, but one feeds it up and keeps it warm, just as the Christ does with the church 30 because we are organs of his body.
31 "Owing to this a man will leave father and mother and enter into a connection with his wife, and the two will become one flesh "; 32 this secret truth is a great one.
I am saying it with reference to Christ and the church; 33 let each of you individually too, though, love his wife just as he does himself.
6:1-24
6 Children, obey your parents in the Lord; for this is right.
2 "Honor your father and mother, " which is the first commandment with a promise, 3 "so that it may be well with you and your time may be long on the earth. " 4 And fathers, do not be provoking to your children, but bring them up with the instruction and admonition of the Lord.
5 Servants, obey those who are your masters in the way of flesh with fear and trembling in single-heartedness as you do the Christ, 6 not in the way of eye-service as man-pleasers do but as servants of Christ’s, doing God’s will whole-souledly, 7 serving in a friendly spirit as doing it for the Lord and not for men, 8 knowing that each one, if he does anything good, will have it coming to him from the Lord, be he slave or freeman.
9 And masters, do the same toward them, going easy as to threatening, knowing that in the heavens is the master of them and of you, and there is no favoritism with him.
10 Henceforth be valiant in the Lord and in the mightiness of his strength; 11 put on God’s armor so that you can stand up to the Devil’s devices, 12 because our match is not with flesh and blood but with the governments, the dominions, the cosmocrats of this darkness, the spiritual essences of wickedness in the heavenly sphere; 13 for this reason take God’s armor in order to be able to defend yourselves on the wicked day, and after you have fought every bit through to stand your ground.
14 So stand your ground with your waists belted with truth and wearing the cuirass of righteousness, 15 and with your feet shod with preparation for carrying the gospel of peace; 16 withal taking the shield of faith, on which you will be able to quench all the flaming missiles of the Evil One.
17 And receive the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is God’s word; 18 praying in the Spirit at every time with every kind of prayer and petition and keeping on the alert for it with all intentness and fullness of petition regarding all God’s people, 19 and for me, that I may be given power to speak with open mouth to make known outspokenly the secret 20 for which I am an ambassador in chains, that I may speak it out as I ought.
21 But in order that you may know of my affairs, how I am getting on, Tychicus, the dear brother and faithful errand-runner in the Lord, will acquaint you with everything; 22 I have sent him to you for this express purpose, to let you know about us and to let him cheer your hearts.
23 Peace to the brothers, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
24 Grace be with all who love our Lord Jesus Christ imperishably.
Colossians
1:1-29
1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through God’s will, and Brother Timothy, 2 to the holy and believing brothers in Christ at Colossae: grace to you, and peace, from God our Father.
3 We always thank God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, as we pray for you, 4 hearing of your faith in Christ Jesus and the love you cherish to all God’s people 5 because of the hope laid up for you in the heavens, about which you have already heard in the words of the truth of the gospel 6 which has arrived among you as it also is in all the world, bearing fruit and growing as it does among you too since the day that you heard and recognized God’s grace in truth 7 as you learned from our dear fellow-servant Epaphras, who is on your behalf a faithful agent of the Christ, 8 who also informed us of your love in the Spirit.
9 For this reason we on our part, since the day when we heard of it, never cease to pray for you and ask that you may be filled with awareness of his will in all spiritual wisdom and insight 10 to walk worthily of the Lord to give him all pleasure, bearing fruit in every good work and growing in awareness of God, 11 energized with all power in accordance with the mightiness of his glory for all persistence and patience, 12 joyously thanking the Father who qualified you for your share in the lot of God’s people in the light; 13 who delivered you out of the jurisdiction of darkness and transferred you into the kingdom of the Son of his love, 14 in whom we have redemption, the pardon of sins,
15 Who is image of the invisible God, firstborn of all creation, 16 because in him everything was created in the heavens and on earth, the visible and the invisible, be it thrones or lordships or governments or dominions everything has been created through him and to come to him, 17 and before everything he is, and in him everything holds together.
18 And he is the head of the body, the church, he who is the beginning, the firstborn out of the dead, in order that he may take the first place in every respect, 19 because in him all the fullness was pleased to make its home 20 and through him to reconcile everything to him, making peace through the blood of his cross, through him whether it were the things on earth or the things in the heavens, 21 and you who had once been estranged and hostile-minded in your wicked deeds, 22 but whom he has now reconciled by his fleshly body through death to present you holy and unblemished and irreproachable before him 23 if so be that you keep to your faith, standing steady on solid foundations and not shifting from the hope of the gospel you heard, which was proclaimed in all creation under the heavens; of which I Paul became an agent.
24 I rejoice now in my sufferings for you, and what stopped short of completeness in the Christ’s sufferings I am filling out in my flesh for his body, which is the church, 25 whose servitor I became in accordance with God’s charge given to me as errand to you, to present God’s word in its fullness, 26 the secret that had been hidden since the ages and the generations but has now been disclosed to his devout believers, 27 to whom God chose to make known what was the wealth of the glory of this secret design among the nations, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory; 28 whom we announce, admonishing every man and teaching every man in all wisdom, in order that we may present every man complete in Christ, 29 to which same end I am toiling and struggling as befits his energy that is powerfully at work in me.
2:1-23
2 For I want you to know what a struggle I am having for you and the ones in Laodicea and as many as have not seen my face in person, 2 that their hearts may be encouraged, they being drawn together in love and instructed into the richest certitude of insight, to the recognition of God’s secret, Christ, 3 in whom all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hidden.
4 I say this in order that nobody may cheat you with plausible talk.
5 For even if I am physically away, yet I am with you in the spirit, rejoicing and witnessing your good order and the solidity of your faith in Christ.
6 So, in such fashion as you took over Christ Jesus the Lord, walk in him, 7 rooted and upbuilt in him and solidly settled in faith as you were taught, plentiful in thanksgiving.
8 Look to it that there be not somebody who carries you off by philosophy and empty deceit along the line of human tradition, of the world’s elements and not of Christ, 9 because in him all the fullness of deity is resident in bodily form, 10 and it is in him you have been brought to fullness, him who is the head of every government and dominion; 11 in whom, also, you were circumcised with a circumcision not done by human hands, in the stripping off of the body of flesh, in the Christ’s circumcision, 12 being buried with him in baptism, in which you were also raised with him through faith in the activities of God who raised him from the dead; 13 and you, when you were dead with your offenses and the uncircumcisedness of your flesh, he brought to life together with him, condoning all our offenses, 14 canceling the bond over us in decrees, which was opposed to us, and has taken it away, nailing it to the cross.
15 Disarming the governments and the dominions, he made a public show of them, celebrating his triumph over them on it.
16 So let nobody pass judgment on you in matters of eating and drinking or in respect to festival or new moon or sabbath, 17 that are a shadow of what was to be but the body belongs to the Christ; 18 let nobody contrive a decision against you with willful humility and worship of the angels, entering into what he has seen, flimsily inflated by his flesh-mind, 19 and not keeping hold of the Head, out of whom all the body, supplied and conjoined through the joints and sinews, makes God’s growth.
20 If you died with Christ away from the world’s elements, why, as if alive in the world, do you go in for decrees, 21 "do not take nor taste nor touch, " 22 altogether things that are bound to perish as they are consumed, in conformity with the commands and teachings of men? 23 which do have a show of wisdom in self-contrived religiousness and humility and severity to the body, not in some sort of honor for repletion of the flesh.
3:1-25
3 So, if you were raised with the Christ, aim at the things above, where the Christ is, sitting at God’s right hand.
2 Have in mind the things above, not the things on the earth; 3 for you did die, and your life is hidden in God with the Christ.
4 When the Christ, our life, comes to be seen, then so will you with him come to be seen in glory.
5 So give over to deadness the organism that rests on the earth, unchastity, uncleanness, passions, evil desire, and greed, which is an idolatry 6 things on account of which God’s anger comes; 7 with which you too occupied yourselves once upon a time, when you were alive in these.
8 But now, you too, discard everything, anger, passionateness, viciousness, abusiveness, offensive language out of your mouths, 9 do not lie to each other, stripping off the old man with his doings 10 and putting on the new man who is being reconstituted into intelligence after the likeness of his Creator, 11 where there is no such thing as Greek and Jew, circumcision and uncircumcision, alien, Scythian, slave, freeman, but Christ is everything and in everybody.
12 So, as holy and dearly loved chosen ones of God’s, put on compassionate hearts, kindness, humility, meekness, patience, 13 bearing with each other and mutually making allowances; if one has found a fault in somebody, in the same way as the Lord showed grace to you, do you the like.
14 And over all these love, which is the connecting link of perfection.
15 And let Christ’s peace have the deciding voice in your hearts, that same peace into which you were called in one body; and be thankful-hearted.
16 Keep the Christ’s word abiding in you richly, teaching and admonishing each other in all wisdom, singing in your hearts to God in thankfulness with psalms, hymns, spiritual songs; 17 and as to anything whatever that you do in word or in act, do everything in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through him.
18 Wives, be in such subordination to your husbands as is the proper thing in the Lord.
19 Husbands, love your wives and do not be cross to them.
20 Children, obey your parents in every respect, for this is a winsome way in the Lord.
21 Fathers, do not nettle your children, so that they may not be disheartened.
22 Servants, obey in every respect those who are your masters in the way of flesh, not in eye-services as man-pleasers do but in single-heartedness, fearing the Lord; 23 whatever you are doing, work at it with a will, as doing it for the Lord and not for men, 24 knowing that you will be paid up for it by the Lord in your inheritance; you are in the service of the Lord Christ.
25 For he who does a wrong will have the wrong he did coming to him, and there is no favoritism.
4 Masters, let your servants have justice and equal rights, knowing that you too have a master in heaven.
2 Keep praying, be on the alert in it, with thanksgiving; 3 praying, along with the rest, for us too, that God will open us a door for the word, for speaking the secret of Christ, that same for which I am in prison, 4 so that I may open it up as I have to speak.
5 Behave wisely toward outsiders, making the best you can of the crisis; 6 let your talk be always in grace, seasoned with salt to know how you need to answer each one.
7 Tychicus, the dear brother and faithful errand-runner and fellow-servant in the Lord, will acquaint you with everything that relates to me; 8 I am sending him to you for this express purpose, to let you know about me and to let him cheer your hearts, 9 with dear and faithful brother Onesimus, who is one of you.
They will give you the news about everything here.
10 My fellow-prisoner Aristarchus sends greetings, and Barnabas’s cousin Mark, about whom you received injunctions, if he comes to you, receive him, 11 and Jesus, known as Justus, these who represent the circumcised community; these are the only ones who are cooperators for the Reign of God, and they were a comfort to me.
12 Epaphras, who is one of you, sends greetings, a servant of Christ Jesus who is always wrestling for you in his prayers that you may be made to stand complete and convinced in everything that is God’s will; 13 for I can testify that he is deeply concerned for you and those at Laodicea and those at Hierapolis.
14 Dear Doctor Luke and Demas send greetings.
15 Give my greetings to the brothers at Laodicea and to Nymphas and the meeting at their house.
16 And when the letter is read to you, get it read in the Laodiceans’ meeting too, and get to read the one from Laodicea.
17 And tell Archippus "Look out for the office you were given in the Lord, to make good in it. "
18 My greeting, Paul’s, with my own hand.
Remember my fetters.
Grace be with you.
1 Thessalonians
1:1-10
1 Paul and Silvanus and Timothy to the church of the Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace and peace to you.
2 We always thank God for you all as we make mention of you in our prayers, 3 continually recalling your work of faith and labor of love and steadfastness of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ before our God and Father, 4 knowing, brothers loved by God, your choosing, 5 that our gospel did not come to you in word only, but also in power and in Holy Spirit and profound conviction, as you know what we were like for your sake when we were among you.
6 And you became imitators of us and of the Lord, receiving the word with joy over the Holy Spirit while in much trouble, 7 so that you became an example to all the believers in Macedonia and in Achaea.
8 For from you the word of the Lord has sounded out not only in Macedonia and Achaea, but in every place the news of your faith toward God is out, so that we have no need to talk of anything; 9 for they themselves report about us what sort of entrance to you we had, and how you turned to God from the idols to belong to a live and genuine God 10 and to await his Son from heaven, the one he raised from the dead, Jesus who delivers us out of the coming wrath.
2:1-20
2 For you yourselves, brothers, know about our entrance to you, that it was not a failure, 2 but after we had suffered beforehand and been outrageously treated, as you know, at Philippi, we were bold enough in our God to speak God’s gospel to you in a hard struggle.
3 For our exhortation is not a result of crankiness nor of uncleanness, nor by way of a trick; 4 but as we have been approved by God to be entrusted with the gospel message, so we speak, not as pleasing men, but God who assays our hearts.
5 For we never dealt in flattering talk, as you know, nor in excuses for moneymaking, God knows, 6 nor tried to get glory from men, either you or others, when we could have made ourselves important as apostles of Christ, 7 but behaved gently in your midst; as a woman cherishes her own children, 8 so yearning over you we were willing to pass out to you not only the gospel of God, but our own lives too, because you had become darlings of ours.
9 For you remember, brothers, our toil and trouble: it was while working night and day so as not to be burdensome to any of you that we proclaimed God’s gospel among you.
10 You are witnesses, and so is God, in what godly and honest and irreproachable fashion we behaved toward you who believe, 11 you know how it was, animating each one of you as a father would his own children and comforting you and admonishing you 12 that you should walk worthily of the God who is calling you to his own reign and glory.
13 And for this reason we too thank God continually, that when you had from us a hearsay report of God you received it as not men’s word but, as it positively is, God’s, the same that is taking effect in you believers; 14 for you, brothers, showed yourselves imitators of the churches of God that there are in Palestine in Christ Jesus, because you too suffered the same things from the men of your own race as did they from the Jews, 15 those who both killed the Lord Jesus and drove us out, and do not please God and are in opposition to all men, 16 forbidding us to speak to the foreigners that they may be saved, so as to fill up their sins always.
But wrath has overtaken them, absolutely.
17 But we, brothers, bereaved of you for a moment’s space in face, not in heart, made it our very special concern, with strong desire, to see your faces; 18 because we did mean to come to you I, Paul, once and twice too and Satan blocked us.
19 For what is our hope or joy or wreath of triumph, or are you not such, before our Lord Jesus at his coming? 20 for you are our glory and joy.
3:1-13
3 For which reason we could stand it no longer, but were fain to be left alone in Athens, 2 and sent Timothy, our brother and God’s helper in the work of the gospel of the Christ, to reinforce your firmness and encourage you in your faith, 3 for nobody to be flurried with these distresses for you know that this is what we are here for; 4 for even when we were with you we told you beforehand that we were to be distressed, and so it turned out, as you know.
5 This was why I myself could stand it no longer and sent to find out about your faith, for fear the Tempter had tempted you and our hard work would not amount to anything.
6 But when just now Timothy came to us from you and brought us the good news about your faith and love, and that you always keep us in kind remembrance, longing to see us just as we do to see you, 7 at this we were cheered up on your account, brothers, in all our difficulties and distresses, by your faith; 8 because we are alive now if you stand firm in the Lord.
9 For what adequate thanks can we return to God for you in view of all the joy we feel because of you before our God, 10 night and day making very special prayers for the chance to see your faces and set right the shortcomings of your faith? 11 And may our God and Father himself, and our Lord Jesus Christ, clear our road to you; 12 and may the Lord give you increasing and surpassing love for each other and for everybody, the same as we have it for you, 13 to stabilize your hearts in blameless holiness before our God and Father at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his holy.
4 For the rest, then, brothers, we request you and urge you in the Lord Jesus that as you had word from us how you have to walk and please God, just the way you are walking, you will do better and better.
2 For you know what instructions we gave you by the Lord Jesus.
3 For this is God’s will, your sanctification, your keeping clear of unchastity, 4 your each knowing how to get his own mate in a dedicative and respectful spirit, 5 not in passion of desire just the same as do the nations who do not know God, 6 so as not to encroach and victimize one’s brother in the business, because the Lord is an avenger of all those things, as we told you beforehand and admonished you.
7 For God did not call us on terms of uncleanness but in sanctification; 8 consequently the disregarder is not disregarding a man but that same God who puts his Holy Spirit in us.
9 But as to brotherliness you are in no need of being written to, for you yourselves are taught by God to love each other 10 for you do, all the brothers in all Macedonia.
But we urge you, brothers, to do better and better, 11 and to make it your ambition to keep quiet and attend to your own affairs and work with your own hands, as we instructed you, 12 in order that you may behave creditably toward outsiders and not be in want of anything.
13 But we do not wish you to be ignorant about those who have gone to their rest, brothers, in order that you may not grieve the same as the others do, who do not have a hope.
14 For if we believe that Jesus died and arose, so also will God, through Jesus, bring with him those who have gone to their rest.
15 For we tell you this on the Lord’s word, that we the living who survive till the Lord’s coming shall not be ahead of those who have gone to rest, 16 because the Lord himself will come down from the sky with a word of command, with an archangel’s voice and with God’s trumpet, and first the dead in Christ will rise, 17 then we the living who survive shall together with them be snatched up in clouds to meet the Lord in air, and thus we shall be with the Lord always.
18 So cheer each other on with these words.
5:1-28
5 But as to the times, brothers, how long and when, you are in no need of being written to, 2 for you yourselves definitely know that as a thief comes in the night, so comes the Day of the Lord.
3 When they say "peace and safety, " then destruction is upon them suddenly, as the birth-pang comes upon a pregnant woman, and they shall not escape.
4 But you, brothers, are not in darkness, to have the Day catch you as a thief does; 5 for you are all of you sons of the light and of the day.
We do not belong to the night nor to the darkness; 6 so then let us not sleep as the rest do, but keep awake and sober.
7 For sleepers sleep in the night, and drinkers are drunk in the night; 8 but let us, who belong to the day, keep sober, putting on the armor of faith and love and as helmet the hope of salvation, 9 because God did not destine us to his anger but to be preserved by salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ 10 who died for us in order that whether we were awake or asleep we might along with him be alive.
11 Wherefore cheer each other on and each one build the next one up, the same way you are doing.
12 And we beg you, brothers, to know those who do the hard work among you and take the lead in your affairs in the Lord and admonish you, 13 and to hold them very specially in love because of their work.
Be at peace among yourselves.
14 And we urge you, brothers, admonish the disorderly, cheer up the fainthearted, stand by the weak, be patient with everybody; 15 see that nobody pays anybody back a bad turn for a bad, but always make good your object, toward each other and toward everybody.
16 Be always joyous, 17 pray continually, 18 give thanks in everything, for this is God’s will in Jesus Christ toward you.
19 Do not put out the fire of the Spirit; 20 do not scorn prophesyings; 21 but try the quality of everything, hold on to what is good, 22 reject every bad article.
23 And may he, the God of peace, sanctify you to perfection, and your spirits and souls and bodies be kept faultlessly safe and sound at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
24 He who calls you is trustworthy, and do it he will.
25 Brothers, pray for us too.
26 Give our greetings to all the brothers with a holy kiss.
27 I adjure you by the Lord that the letter be read to all the brothers.
28 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
2 Thessalonians
1:1-12
1 Paul and Silvanus and Timothy to the church of the Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ: 2 Grace and peace to you from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
3 We are bound to thank God always for you, brothers, as is right and proper, that your faith is growing sturdily and the love of each one of you to the others is increasing, 4 so that we ourselves boast of you among the churches of God for your steadfastness and faith amid all your persecutions and the distresses you endure, 5 an exhibit of God’s just rulings so that you are to be deemed worthy of that same Kingdom of God for which you are suffering, 6 if just it is by God’s standard to repay distress to those who distress you, 7 and to you who are distressed relief with us at the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven with the angels of his power 8 in flaming fire to give punishment to those that do not know God and to those that do not obey the gospel of our Lord Jesus; 9 these shall pay the penalty, eternal destruction from the Lord’s presence and from the glory of his strength 10 when he comes to manifest his glory among his holy ones and to be venerated among all those who have believed because our testimony to you was believed on that day.
11 To this same end we are always praying for you that our God may deem you worthy to be called and may potently bring to full realization every impulse of goodwill and work of faith, 12 so that the name of our Lord Jesus may have its glory manifested in you, and you yours in it, in accordance with the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ.
2 But we beg you, brothers, as to the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and our being gathered to him, 2 not to shake right out of your senses nor be disquieted either by an inspiration or by an argument, or by a letter as being by us, with the idea that the Day of the Lord is upon us.
3 Do not let anybody deceive you in any way, because unless the apostasy comes first and the Man of Wickedness is disclosed, the man bound for destruction, 4 he who is in opposition to every so-called god or object of worship, so that he seats himself in God’s temple, declaring himself to be a god 5 do you not remember that while I was still with you I told you all this? 6 and you know now what is holding him back to be disclosed at his own time.
7 For the Secret of Wickedness is already at work; only he who is now holding things back until he gets out of the way, 8 and then the Wicked One will be disclosed, whom the Lord will consume by the breath of his mouth and will supersede by the intervention of his presence; 9 whose presence is as is proper for Satan’s working, in all power and tokens and wonders of untruth 10 and in all deceitfulness of wrong for those who are perishing, inasmuch as they did not accept the love of the truth so that they should be saved, 11 and for this reason God is sending them a working of delusion so that they shall believe the untrue, 12 that all may be judged who have not believed the truth but have been satisfied with wrong.
13 But we are bound to thank God always for you, brothers loved by the Lord, that God from the first chose you for salvation in sanctification of spirit and faith in truth, 14 to which same thing he called you through our gospel message, for preservation in the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
15 So then, brothers, stand firm and hold on to the propositions you were taught by either word or letter of ours.
16 And may our Lord Jesus Christ himself and God our Father, who loved us and graciously gave us an eternal encouragement and a good hope, 17 encourage your hearts and fortify them in every good work and word.
3 For the rest, pray for us, brothers, that the word of the Lord may speed on and show its gloriousness the same as it does with you, 2 and that we may be delivered from criminal and vicious men; for it is not everybody that has faith.
3 But the Lord is faithful, who will fortify you and guard you from the Evil One.
4 And we trust to you in the Lord that what we are enjoining you to do you are also doing, and will do.
5 And may the Lord pilot your hearts into God’s love and Christ’s steadfastness.
6 But we enjoin you, brothers, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that you are to avoid every brother that takes to irregular courses, not in accordance with the instruction you had from us.
7 For you know yourselves how you have to imitate us, that we did not live irregularly among you, 8 nor get our board gratis from anybody, but toiling and moiling night and day at work, for the sake of not burdening any of you 9 not that we do not have a right, but in order that we might give ourselves as a model for you to imitate.
10 For even when we were with you we gave you this injunction, If one will not work let him not eat either.
11 For we hear of some among you living irregularly, not working at anything but frittering away their time; 12 but such we enjoin and exhort to work quietly and eat bread of their own.
13 But for yourselves, brothers, do not give up doing what is good.
14 And if anyone does not obey our words in this letter, note that man as a man not to be mixed up with, in order that he may be ashamed of himself; 15 and do not regard him as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.
16 And may the Lord of Peace himself give you peace all the time in every way.
The Lord be with you all.
17 Greeting in my own hand from me, Paul, which is a token in every letter; this is the way I write.
18 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
1 Timothy
1:1-20
1 Paul, Christ Jesus’s apostle by order of God our Savior and Christ Jesus our hope, 2 to Timothy my own child in faith: grace, mercy, peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
3 As I urged you to wait on at Ephesus when I took my trip to Macedonia in order that you might instruct some people not to teach erratic notions 4 nor devote attention to myths and endless genealogies, which give anybody more of fields for research than of attention to God’s affairs in faith, 5 but the object of the injunction is love, out of a pure heart and good conscience and unfeigned faith, 6 things which some have failed to hit upon and have run off into futile talk, 7 wanting to be teachers of the law when they have no sense either of the things they say or of what it is they are being so positive about.
8 But we know that the law is a fine thing if one uses it in the lawful way, 9 knowing this, that the law is not enacted for an honest man but for such as are lawless and refractory, impious and sinful, unholy and profane, such as raise their hands against father and mother, murderers, 10 libertines, homosexuals, kidnappers, liars, perjurers, and whatever else is in opposition to sound teaching, 11 in accordance with the gospel of the grace of the blessed God which was entrusted to me.
12 I thank him who put power into me, our Lord Jesus Christ, that he regarded me as faithful, assigning me to service, 13 when I had previously been a blasphemer and a persecutor and a ruffian; but mercy was shown me because I did it ignorantly in unbelief, 14 and our Lord’s grace overtopped, with faith and hope in Christ Jesus.
15 The saying is a trustworthy one, and deserves all assent, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners.
Of whom I am the foremost; 16 but this was why mercy was shown me, in order that in me the foremost one Jesus Christ might show utter patience, that I might serve as an outline sketch of those who were to believe on him for eternal life.
17 And to the King of the Ages, the imperishable, invisible only God, be honor and glory forever and ever; amen.
18 This injunction I address to you, my child Timothy, in accordance with the prophecies that led the way to you, that under them you should fight the good campaign, 19 having faith, and a good conscience, which some have thrown overboard and so come to shipwreck as to the faith; 20 among these Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I handed over to Satan in order that they might be given a lesson not to blaspheme.
2:1-15
2 I urge, then, first of all, that petitions, prayers, intercessions, thanksgivings, be presented for all men; 2 for emperors and all our superiors, in order that we may lead a still and quiet life in all piety and propriety.
3 This is a good thing and a thing welcome to God our Savior, 4 who wills that all men should be saved and come into awareness of truth.
5 For there is one God, one mediator too between God and men, a man, Christ Jesus, 6 he who gave himself as a ransom for everybody; the attestation when the right time came, 7 for which I was appointed a herald and apostle, I am telling the truth, not lying, a teacher of the nations in faith and truth.
8 So I wish to have the men pray in every place, raising godly hands without anger and argument; 9 in the same way, to have women adorn themselves by virtuous self-restraint with modesty and discretion, not by hairdressing and gold or pearls or expensive clothing, 10 but what befits women who profess religiousness, by means of good works.
11 Let a woman learn in quietness in all submissiveness; 12 but I do not permit a woman to teach nor to dictate to a man, but to be in quietness.
13 For Adam was formed first, then Eve; 14 and Adam was not deceived, but the woman was befooled into violation of the command.
15 But she will be saved in her childbearing, if they remain in faith and love and consecration with discretion.
3:1-16
3 The saying is a trustworthy one, "If one has an inclination to a visitor’s place, he is desiring a good work. " 2 So the church visitor must be unimpeachable, husband of one wife, sober, discreet, well-behaved, hospitable, good at teaching, 3 not disorderly over his wine, not apt to come to blows, but reasonable, one who keeps out of fights, who has no love for money, 4 who manages his own household well, having children behaving submissively with all correctness 5 (but if one does not know how to manage his own household, how is he to take care of God’s church?); 6 not a new convert, so that he may not get his head turned and fall under the judgment of gossip.
7 And he must also have good attestation from the outsiders, so that he may not fall under the gibes of gossip and into its trap.
8 Deacons, in the same way, dignified, not double-tongued, not interested in much wine, not mercenary, 9 holding the secret of the faith in a clean conscience; 10 and let these too be investigated first, then let them serve as deacons when of unblemished reputation.
11 Women, in the same way, dignified, not scandalmongers, sober, reliable in everything.
12 Let deacons be husbands of one wife who manage their children and their own households well.
13 For those who have done good service as deacons are securing for themselves a good standing and great boldness in faith in Christ Jesus.
14 I am writing you this in hopes of coming to you pretty soon; 15 but if I am long about it, in order that you may know how one has to behave in God’s household, which the church of the living God, pillar and foothold of the truth, is.
16 And, recognizedly, piety’s secret is a great one: "he who was manifested in flesh, was vindicated in spirit, was seen by angels, was proclaimed among nations, was believed in the world, was taken up in glory. "
4:1-16
4 But the Spirit says explicitly that in later times some will drop out of the faith, giving their attention to misleading spirits and the teachings of demons 2 in the insincerity of falsifiers who carry a brand on their consciences, 3 who forbid people to marry, and tell them to abstain from foods which God created to be partaken of with thanks by those who have faith and awareness of the truth; 4 because every creature of God’s is good, and nothing is to be rejected when it can be received with thanksgiving; 5 for it is hallowed by God’s word and invocation.
6 By giving the brothers this advice you will be a good agent of Christ Jesus’s, training yourself in the words of the faith and of the good teaching which you have listened to; 7 but ignore unsanctified puerile fictions.
And exercise yourself in piety; 8 for physical exercise is beneficial in a small way, but piety is beneficial for everything, having a promise of life, life now and the future life; 9 the saying is a trustworthy one, and deserves all assent.
10 For it is to this end we are toiling and struggling, because we have set our hopes on the living God, who is the savior of all men, especially of believers.
11 Enjoin and teach these things.
12 Let nobody despise your youthfulness, but set an example to the brothers in words, in life, in love, in faith, in purity.
13 Till I come, give your attention to the reading, to the exhortation, to the teaching.
14 Do not neglect the gift you have in you, which was given to you through a prophecy with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery.
15 Practice on these things, take up your time with these, in order that your progress may be evident to everybody.
16 Attend to yourself and to the teaching; keep on with them; for in doing this you will save both yourself and your hearers.
5:1-25
5 Do not rebuke an elderly man but appeal to him as a father; younger men as brothers, 2 older women as mothers, younger ones as sisters in all purity.
3 Honor widows who really are widows.
4 But if any widow has children or grandchildren let them learn first to show piety toward their own family and to make returns to their progenitors; for this is a thing welcome to God.
5 But the real widow, left alone in the world, has her hope set on God and keeps up her petitions and prayers night and day; 6 but the self-indulgent one is dead while she is alive.
7 Give these injunctions too, in order that they may be unimpeachable.
8 But if one does not look out for his own, and especially those of his immediate family, he has disowned the faith and is worse than an unbeliever.
9 Let a widow be listed as such when she is not less than sixty years old, widow of one husband, 10 well attested for good works, if she has brought up children, if she has practiced hospitality, if she has washed the feet of people of God’s, if she has assisted persons in distress, if she has been assiduous in every good work.
11 But decline younger widows; for when they get too high-strung for the Christ, they want to marry, 12 incurring a judgment because they slighted their first faith.
13 And at the same time they also learn to be idlers going the rounds of the houses, and not only idlers but also chatterers and busybodies, talking of what they ought not.
14 So I would have younger ones marry, bear children, keep house, not give the opponent any opening toward abusive talk; 15 for some have already turned off to follow Satan.
16 If any believing woman has widows, let her assist them and the church not be burdened, in order that it may assist the real widows.
17 Let elders who have done well in management be deemed to deserve double honor, especially those who exert themselves in speaking and teaching.
18 For the text says "You shall not muzzle a threshing beast "; and a worker deserves his pay. 19 Do not accept an accusation against an elder unless on the word of two or three witnesses.
20 Reprove publicly those who sin, in order that the rest may on their part have something to be afraid of.
21 I notify you before God and Christ Jesus and the chosen angels to take care of these things without prejudging, not doing anything in the way of favor.
22 Do not be quick to lay hands on anybody, nor share other people’s sins; keep yourself pure.
23 Do not keep on with water-drinking, but use a little wine on account of your stomach and your frequent illnesses.
24 Some men’s sins are obvious, going ahead of them to judgment, and some their sins follow up.
25 In the same way good works too are obvious, and such as are otherwise cannot be hidden.
6:1-21
6 Let as many as are under a yoke in servitude regard their masters as entitled to all honor, in order that God’s name and the teaching may not be vilified.
2 And let those who have believing masters not be disrespectful to them because they are brothers, but be the more their servants because those who enjoy the benefit are believers and loved ones.
These things teach, and exhort to these.
3 If one teaches erratic notions and does not apply himself to sound words, those of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the teaching that is along the line of piety, 4 he is conceit-ridden, not knowing anything, but infatuated about arguments and disputed technicalities, out of which come grudges, quarreling, vilification, base suspicions, 5 frictions between men unsound in mind and bereft of the truth who suppose piety to be an economic resource.
6 But a great resource is piety with contentment; 7 for we brought nothing into the world, because neither can we carry anything out; 8 but when we have food to sustain us and coverings to protect us we shall be well enough off.
9 But those who want to be rich fall into temptation and a trap and many stupid and harmful desires which sink men into destruction and perdition.
10 For the love of money is the root of all things bad; hankering for it, some have strayed away from the faith and stabbed themselves with many pains.
11 But for your part, man of God, keep clear of these things; and aim at honesty, piety, faith, love, constancy, meekness under provocation.
12 Play the great game of faith, grasp the eternal life to which you were called and made the good confession before many witnesses.
13 I enjoin you before God who gives everything its life, and Christ Jesus who before Pontius Pilate bore his witness to the good confession, 14 to keep the commandment spotlessly, irreproachably, till the oncoming of our Lord Jesus Christ; 15 which, when the right time comes, the blessed only Potentate will display, the King of all who reign and Lord of all who rule, 16 he who alone has immortality, who inhabits unapproachable light, whom none of men have seen nor can see; to whom belong honor and might eternal; amen.
17 Enjoin those who are rich in the present world not to have lofty ideas and not to have their hopes set on uncertainty of wealth, but on God, him who lets us have everything in rich measure to use and enjoy; 18 to practice beneficence, be rich in good works, ready in sharing what they have, loyal in solidarity, 19 laying away for themselves a good foundation toward the future that they may have a hold on the life that is life.
20 Timothy, safeguard the deposit, turning off from the unsanctified nonsense and counter-propositions of what is miscalled knowledge, 21 which some have promised and therein missed the mark of the faith.
Grace be with you and yours.
2 Timothy
1:1-18
1 Paul, apostle of Christ Jesus through God’s will in accordance with the promise that we are to have life in Christ Jesus, 2 to my dear child Timothy: grace, mercy, peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
3 I thank God, to whom I perform service with a clear conscience as did my fathers, that I keep the mention of you so uninterrupted in my prayers, night and day 4 longing to see you, remembering your tears in order that I may be filled with joy 5 by getting a reminiscence of the unfeigned faith you have in you, which resided first in your grandmother Lois and your mother Eunice, and does, I am persuaded, in you too.
6 For which reason I am reminding you to brighten up the fire of the gift of God which you have in you through the laying on of my hands; 7 for God did not give us a spirit of timorousness but of power and love and discipline.
8 So do not be ashamed of testifying to our Lord nor of me his man in prison, but in the hardships of the gospel work take a share appropriate to the power of God, 9 who saved us and gave us a holy call in accordance not with our deeds but with an intent and grace of his own, given to us in Christ Jesus eternities ago 10 but now made apparent by the oncoming of our Savior Christ Jesus, who superseded death and gave the illumination of life and imperishability through the gospel.
11 For which I was appointed a herald and apostle and teacher; 12 for which same cause I am suffering these things; but I am not abashed, for I know him whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is able to guard for that day what I left in his care.
13 Have an outline of sound words heard from me; in faith and the love that is in Christ Jesus 14 safeguard the good deposit through the Holy Spirit our inmate.
15 You know this, that everybody in the province of Asia turned his back on me; among whom are Phygelus and Hermogenes.
16 The Lord grant mercy to Onesiphorus’s family, because he heartened me up over and over, and was not ashamed of my chains 17 but, when he was in Rome, took pains to hunt me up and found me; 18 the Lord grant him to find mercy from the Lord on that day.
And what services he rendered in Ephesus you know right well.
2:1-26
2 So for your part, my child, be valiant in the grace that there is in Christ Jesus; 2 and what you heard from me with many witnesses, those things commit to trustworthy men who shall be competent in turn to teach others.
3 Take your share of hardships like a good soldier of Christ Jesus.
4 Everybody in military service keeps clear of entanglement in the businesses of daily life so as to satisfy the one who enlisted him.
5 Or if one goes into an athletic contest either, he gets no wreath unless he contends according to the rules.
6 The hardworking husbandman has to be the first to enjoy a part of the crop.
7 Note what I say, for the Lord will give you insight into everything.
8 Remember Jesus Christ, risen from the dead, a descendant of David, in accordance with my preaching, 9 in which I am having hardships to the extent of imprisonment as a criminal; but God’s word is not imprisoned; 10 for this reason I hold on through everything for the sake of such as are chosen, in order that they too may come in for the salvation that there is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.
11 The saying is a trustworthy one, "For if we died with him, so shall we live with him; 12 if we are bearing the brunt, so shall we reign with him; if we disown him, so will he disown us; 13 if we are distrustful, he remains trusty, for he cannot disown himself. "
14 Remind people of these things, admonishing them before God not to wrangle over technicalities to no useful purpose, upsetting the listeners.
15 Make a point of presenting yourself to God tried and true, a worker with nothing to be ashamed of, keeping the straight line of the word of truth; 16 but stand away from outpourings of unsanctified nonsense; for they will go further in irreligiousness, 17 and their talk will spread like a gangrene, among whom are Hymenaeus and Philetus, 18 who missed the mark of truth, saying that there has already been a resurrection, and are wrecking some people’s faith.
19 However, God’s solid foundation still stands, having this seal, "The Lord knows the ones that belong to him " and "Let everybody who names the Lord’s name keep clear of wrong. " 20 And in a great house there is not only gold and silver ware but also woodenware and crockery, and some pieces destined for honor, some for ignominy; 21 so if one cleans himself out from these things he will be a piece for honor, consecrated, useful to the owner, prepared for every good work.
22 But tear yourself away from the desires of youth, and aim at righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those who call on the Lord out of a pure heart.
23 But try to keep out of foolish and half-educated arguments, knowing that they breed quarrels; 24 and a servant of the Lord’s must not quarrel but be gentle toward everybody, a good teacher, a man to put up with hard treatment, 25 educating opponents by mild methods in case God should give them repentance into recognition of the truth 26 and they should sober up out of the Devil’s trap, captured by him, into His will.
3:1-17
3 But know this, that in the last days difficult times will come on; 2 for men will be selfish, money-mad, pretentious, proud, scurrilous, disobedient to parents, thankless, graceless, 3 loveless, implacable, slanderers, slaves of appetite, ferocious, disinclined to goodness, 4 traitorous, headstrong, conceited, more devoted to pleasure than to God, 5 having a formulation of piety but denying its efficacy; eschew these too.
6 For to this class belong those who slip into houses and get into their hands females loaded up with sins, led along by miscellaneous desires, 7 always learning and never able to come to awareness of truth.
8 And in just the same way as Jannes and Jambres opposed themselves to Moses these too oppose themselves to the truth, men of ruined mind, incompetent for matters of faith; 9 but they will make no further progress, for their senselessness will be evident to everybody, just as those men’s came to be.
10 But you observed my teaching, conduct, purpose, faith, patience, love, steadiness, 11 persecutions, sufferings, what things happened to me at Antioch, at lconium, at Lystra, what persecutions I underwent and the Lord delivered me out of all.
12 And all who propose to live piously in Christ Jesus will also be persecuted; 13 but scoundrels and impostors will make progress for the worse, misguiding and misguided.
14 But as for you, remain in what you learned and were given assurance of, knowing from whom you learned it 15 and that ever since you were a baby you have known sacred literature such as could give you the wisdom for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus.
16 Every text is inspired by God and useful for teaching, for reproof, for correction, for training in doing right, 17 in order that the man of God may be a whole man, rounded out to fitness for every good work.
4:1-22
4 I notify you before God and Christ Jesus who is to judge living men and dead men, and by his oncoming and his reign, 2 proclaim the word; push in with a good opening or without, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all patience and along every line of teaching.
3 For there will be a time when they will not stand sound teaching, but to suit their own desires will pile up teachers for themselves as they get their ears tickled, 4 and avert their ears from the truth and turn off to the fictions.
5 But for your part be sober in every respect, bear hardships, do a gospel preacher’s work, do your service thoroughly.
6 For as for me, I am a cup that is already being poured on the sacrifice, and it is almost time for me to be getting away.
7 I have played the great game, I have run the race through, I have kept the faith: 8 what is left is that I have awaiting me the wreath of righteousness, which the Lord, the just judge, will deliver to me on that day.
And not only to me but also to all who have been in love with his oncoming.
9 Try hard to come to me right off; 10 for Demas left me in the lurch, falling in love with the present world, and went to Thessalonica; Crescens to Galatia; Titus to Dalmatia; 11 Luke is the only one with me.
Pick up Mark and bring him with you, for he is valuable to me for errands.
12 And Tychicus I sent to Ephesus.
13 When you come bring the poncho I left at Troas with Carpus, and the books, especially the parchments.
14 Alexander the coppersmith injured me in many ways; the Lord will repay him in accordance with his deeds.
15 Be on your guard against him yourself, for he opposed our words much.
16 At my first defense nobody rallied to me, everybody left me in the lurch; may it not be counted against them.
17 But the Lord stood by me and put power into me in order that through me the proclamation might be consummated and all the nations might hear, and I was rescued out of a lion’s mouth.
18 The Lord will rescue me out of the way of every deed of evil and will save me into his heavenly kingdom; to whom be glory forever and ever.
19 Give my greetings to Prisca and Aquila and Onesiphorus’s family.
20 Erastus stayed at Corinth; and Trophimus I left at Miletus sick.
21 Try hard to come before winter.
Eubulus sends you greetings, and Pudens and Linus and Claudia and all the brothers.
22 The Lord be with your spirit.
Grace be with you and yours.
Titus
1:1-16
1 Paul, servant of God, and Jesus Christ’s delegate for the matter of the faith of God’s chosen and their awareness of truth along the line of piety 2 in the hope of eternal life, which God, who has no falsehoods, promised ages ago 3 but disclosed his word at the right time by a proclamation with which I was entrusted by order of God our savior, 4 to Titus my very own child by common faith, grace and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Savior.
5 I left you in Crete for this purpose, to have you straighten out what remained to be seen to and appoint elders in the different cities as I directed you 6 anyone who is of blameless reputation, husband of one wife, having believing children not under accusations of debauchery nor insubordinate.
7 For the church visitor must be of blameless reputation as God’s steward, not high and mighty, not hot-tempered, not disorderly over his wine, not apt to come to blows, not mercenary, 8 but hospitable, loving whatever is good, discreet, honest, godly, master of his appetites, 9 in touch with the trustworthy ideas that agree with the teaching, in order that he may be able both to exhort in sound instruction and to confute opponents.
10 For there are many, insubordinate gabblers and delusionists, especially those of the circumcision, 11 whom one must silence, people who wreck whole families, teaching from mercenary motives what ought not to be taught.
12 One of them, a prophet of their very own, said
"The Cretans, ever liars, vile cattle, idle maws. " 13 This testimony is a true one.
For which reason show up their errors rigorously in order that they may be sound in the faith, 14 not giving their attention to Jewish fictions and the commandments of human beings who turn their backs on the truth.
15 Everything is clean for clean men; but for polluted unbelievers nothing is clean, but both their mind and their conscience are polluted.
16 They avow that they know God, but in their acts they disavow it, being abominated and disobedient and worthless for any good purpose.
2 But as for you, speak what is appropriate to sound teaching: 2 that aged men be sober, dignified, discreet, sound in faith, in love, in constancy; 3 aged women, in the same way, saintlike in demeanor, not scandalmongers nor slaves to drink, good advisers 4 in order that they may train the young women to be affectionate to their husbands, affectionate to their children, 5 discreet, pure, homemakers, kind, submissive to their husbands, in order that God’s word may not be made a butt for vilification.
6 In the same way exhort the younger men to be discreet about everything, 7 setting an example of good works yourself, presenting in your teaching untaintedness, dignity, 8 irreprovable sound words, in order that he who takes the opposite side may be shamed by not having anything harsh to say about us; 9 servants to be submissive to their masters in everything, to be pleasant, not talking back, 10 not purloining but showing all good faithfulness, in order that they may in every respect adorn the teaching of God our savior.
11 For God’s grace has come on the scene with salvation for all men, 12 schooling us to disown impiety and mundane desires and live discreetly and honestly and piously in the present world, 13 watching for the blessed hope and oncoming of the glory of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ, 14 who gave himself for us to redeem us from all wickedness and cleanse for himself a people specially his own, zealous for good works.
15 Speak these things and exhort to them and see to people’s conformity to them, with all imperativeness; let nobody make light of you.
3:1-15
3 Remind them to be submissive and obedient to governments and authorities, to be ready for every good work, 2 to vilify nobody, to keep out of fights, to be reasonable and show all gentleness toward all men.
3 For we ourselves were once stupid, disobedient, drifters, in servitude to varied desires and pleasures, leading a life of viciousness and envy, odious, hating each other; 4 but when kindness and goodwill came on from our savior God, 5 not as the outcome of deeds in righteousness that we did but in the way of his mercy he saved us by the bath of rebirth and renovation by the Holy Spirit, 6 which he poured out on us richly through Jesus Christ our Savior, 7 in order that being justified by his grace we might become heirs with hope of eternal life.
8 The saying is a trustworthy one, and about these things I want you to be positive, in order that those who have believed God may take care to practice good works.
These things are good and useful to men; 9 but stand away from foolish arguments and tracings of genealogies and quarreling and fights over the law, for they are useless and futile.
10 Have nothing more to do with a troublemaker after one and a second admonition, 11 knowing that such a man is perverted and is sinning when he is self-condemned.
12 When I send Artemas to you, or Tychicus, try to come to me promptly at Nicopolis; for I have decided to be there through the winter.
13 Give Zenas the legist and Apollos your best send-off so that they shall have no lack of anything.
14 And let our people also learn to practice good works for occasions of emergency, so that they may not be unfruitful.
15 All who are with me send you greetings.
Give my greetings to those who love us in faith.
Grace be with you all.
Philemon
1:1-25
1 Paul, Christ Jesus’s man in prison, and Brother Timothy, to our dearly loved friend and co-worker Philemon 2 and Sister Apphia and our fellow-soldier Archippus and the meeting at your house: 3 grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
4 I always thank my God as I make mention of you in my prayers, 5 hearing of the love and faith you cherish toward the Lord Jesus and to all the people of God, 6 that your solidarity in the faith may take effect in the knowledge of every good thing that there is in us toward Christ.
7 For I felt great gladness and encouragement over your love, because the hearts of God’s people have been set at rest through you, brother.
8 Wherefore, though I have in Christ plenty of claim to enjoin you to do the right thing, 9 for love’s sake I prefer to appeal to your goodwill.
Being such as I am, Paul, an old man and now a prisoner for Jesus Christ besides, 10 I am appealing to you about my child who has been born to me in my chains, Onesimus, 11 the one who was once good for nothing for you but is now good for a great deal both for you and for me; 12 whom I am sending back to you, him who is the heart of my heart 13 whom I wanted to retain with me in order that he might take your place in doing services for me during my imprisonment for the gospel; 14 but I was not willing to do anything without word from you, in order that your goodness might not be in a sense compulsory but in a voluntary way.
15 For maybe it was for this purpose he was parted from you for a moment, in order that you might have him back eternally yours, 16 no longer as a slave but above that, a dear brother, dear to me but how much dearer to you both in flesh and in the Lord!
17 So if you count me as a comrade, receive him as you would me.
18 And if he did you any injury or owes anything, charge that to me; 19 I Paul write it with my own hand, I will pay to say nothing of your owing your own self to me into the bargain.
20 Yes, brother, let me have joy of you in the Lord; set my heart at rest in Christ.
21 I write you in assurance of your obedience, knowing that you will do even beyond what I say.
22 But, at the same time, get a room ready for me; for I hope that through your prayers I shall be granted to you.
23 Epaphras my fellow-prisoner in Christ Jesus, 24 and Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, Luke, my co-workers, send you greetings.
25 The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirits.
Hebrews
1:1-14
1 Fragmentarily and variously did God of old speak to the fathers in the prophets, 2 but has in these latter days spoken to us in a Son whom he has appointed heir to everything, through whom also he made the universe; who, 3 being beam of his glory and imprint of his essence, and actuating all things by his word of power, took his seat at the right hand of the Majesty on high when he had made purgation of sins, 4 becoming as much better than the angels as he has inherited a more transcendent name than they.
5 For to which of the angels did he ever say "You are my son, I have this day brought you to birth, " and again "I will be father to him and he shall be son to me "? 6 and when he shall again bring in the firstborn into the world of men he says "and let all God’s angels do him reverence. " 7 And as to the angels he says "he who makes his angels winds, and his servitors flame "; 8 but as to the Son "God is your throne forever and ever, and the scepter of integrity is the scepter of his reign.
9 You loved rectitude and hated wickedness; for this reason God, your God, has anointed you with the oil of joy beyond your fellows, " 10 and "You at the beginning, Lord, laid the foundations of the earth, and the heavens are works of your hands: 11 they will perish, but you abide; and all of them will grow old as a cloak does, 12 and like a mantle you will roll them up like a cloak, too, will they be changed; but you are the same and your years will not come short. " 13 But as to which of the angels has he ever said "Sit at my right hand till I make your enemies the footstool for your feet "? 14 Are they not, all of them, servient spirits that are sent on errands in behalf of those who are to inherit salvation?
2:1-18
2 For this reason we must pay special attention to what we have heard, for fear we should drop away.
2 For if the word spoken through angels proved sure, and every violation or nonobservance received due requital, 3 how shall we escape after neglecting such a great salvation? which, having begun to be spoken through the Lord, was confirmed to us by those who had heard it, 4 God adding his attestation by tokens and wonders and varied miracles and grants of the Holy Spirit according to his will.
5 For not to angels did he subject the future earth of which we are speaking; 6 because someone has somewhere testified in these words: "What is a man, that thou rememberest him? or a son of man, that thou dost look after him? 7 Thou didst make him a little inferior to the angels, didst garland him with glory and honor, 8 didst subject everything underneath his feet, " For in subjecting everything to him he has left nothing unsubjected to him, but now we do not yet see everything subjected to him; 9 but him who was made a little inferior to the angels, Jesus, we do see garlanded with glory and honor so that by God’s grace he may taste death for everyone.
10 For it befitted him for whom everything exists and through whom everything exists that in bringing many sons to glory he should perfect through suffering their leader in salvation.
11 For the sanctifier and the sanctified all come of one; for which reason he is not ashamed of calling them brothers, 12 saying "I will announce thy name to my brothers, in the midst of the congregation I will hymn thy praise, " 13 and again "I will rest my confidence in him, " and again "Lo, I and the children God has given me. " 14 So, since the children have been sharing flesh and blood, he himself similarly participated in the same, that through death he might quell him who wields the might of death that is, the Devil 15 and deliver those who for the fear of death were doomed to slavery all their lives.
16 For he does not take up angels, methinks, but takes up the descendants of Abraham.
17 Whence he had to be made in all respects like his brothers, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest for our relations to God, to make propitiation for the people’s sins.
18 For by the fact that he himself has suffered from temptation he is able to help the tempted.
3:1-19
3 Hence, holy brothers, participants in the celestial call, look at Jesus the apostle and high priest of our confession, 2 faithful to the one who appointed him in the same way as Moses was faithful in his house.
3 For he has been awarded more glory than Moses insofar as he who constructed the house has more honor than the house.
4 For every house is constructed by somebody; but he who constructed everything is God, 5 and Moses was faithful in all his house as a servant for a testimony of what was to be spoken, 6 but Christ as a son over his house; whose house we are if we retain our confidence and prideful hope.
7 Wherefore, as the Holy Spirit says "Today, if you hear his voice, 8 do not harden your hearts as at the embittering, as on the day of the testing in the wilderness, 9 where your fathers made a test for approval and saw my deeds for forty years, 10 wherefore I was disgusted with that generation and said ‘They are wrong-headed all the time and do not know my ways,’ 11 as I swore in my anger ‘They shall not come into my rest,’ " 12 look to it, brothers, that there shall not be in any one of you a vicious heart of unbelief in breaking away from the living God, 13 but exhort each other each day as long as "today " is so called, in order that there may not any one of you be hardened by the deceits of sin; 14 for we have become the Christ’s "fellows " if we hold firm to the end the resolution we began with, 15 while it is said "Today, if you hear his voice, do not harden your hearts as at the embittering. " 16 For who did the embittering when they had heard? why, was it not all who had come out of Egypt by Moses’s agency? 17 and with whom was he disgusted for forty years? was it not with those who had sinned, whose limbs dropped in the wilderness? 18 and to whom did he swear that they should not come into his rest except to those who had disbelieved? 19 and we see that they could not come in because of unbelief.
4 So let us be afraid lest when there is left a promise of coming into his rest any one of you should perchance appear to have fallen short 2 for we have heard a gospel, as they too had, but the words they heard did them no good, they not meeting the hearers with faith.
3 For we believers come into rest, as he says "as I swore in my anger ‘They shall not come into my rest’ " though it was back at the foundation of the world that the works were done.
4 For he somewhere says like this about the seventh day, "And God rested on the seventh day from all his works, " 5 and in this passage again "They shall not come into my rest "; 6 so since it remains that some come into it, and those who heard the gospel before did not come in because of disobedience, 7 he again defines a certain day, "today, " saying in David so long afterward, as aforesaid, "Today, if you hear his voice, do not harden your hearts. " 8 For if Joshua had brought them to rest he would not be speaking about another day afterward.
9 So then there remains a sabbath for God’s people.
10 For he who has come into his rest is resting from his own works just as God did from his.
11 So let us make it our concern to come into that rest, in order that no one may fall by the same pattern of disobedience.
12 For God’s word is living and effective and a surer cutter than any two-edged sword, and penetrative to the dissection of soul and spirit, of joints and marrows, and a judge of a heart’s thoughts and conceptions; 13 and not a creature escapes his notice, but everything is naked and thrown flat on its back for his eyes of whom we are speaking.
14 So, having a great high priest who has gone past the skies, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold on to our confession.
15 For we do not have a high priest that cannot feel our weaknesses, but one who has met temptations of like nature in all respects without sin.
16 So let us come to the throne of grace with confidence in order that we may obtain mercy and find grace for timely help.
5:1-14
5 For every high priest, taken from among men, is appointed on men’s behalf in their relations to God, to offer gifts and sacrifices for sins, 2 being able to take a reasonable attitude toward those who blunder and stray since he too is beset by weakness 3 and because of it is obliged to offer sin-offerings on his own account just as he does on the people’s.
4 And one does not take the honor to himself but enters upon it at God’s call in the same way as Aaron did.
5 In this same way the Christ did not glorify himself into the office of high priest, but he who spoke to him in the words "You are my son, I have this day brought you to birth, " 6 as he says in another passage too "You are a priest forever in such station as Melchisedek’s was. "
7 Who, having in his days of flesh offered with strong outcries and tears both petitions and supplications to him who could save him from death, and having been listened to for his godliness, 8 learned obedience by suffering, Son though he was, 9 and, perfected, became for all who obey him the author of an eternal salvation, 10 being addressed by God as a high priest "in such station as Melchisedek’s was. "
11 About whom we have much to say, and hard to explain in the saying, since you have come to be dull-eared 12 for when you ought to be teachers on account of the time that has elapsed, you are again in need of having someone teach you the primary elements of God’s oracles, and have come to be in need of milk, not of solid food.
13 For anyone who takes milk is unversed in the discussion of righteousness; for he is an infant, 14 but solid food is for grown men, those who from experience have their senses exercised for discrimination between good and bad.
6 Wherefore let us drop primary propositions about the Christ and push on to adult work, not re-laying a foundation of repentance from dead works and of faith in God, 2 instruction about baptisms and laying on of hands, resurrection of the dead and eternal judgment.
3 And this we will do if God permits.
4 For it is impossible to renew again to repentance those who were once lighted up and tasted the heavenly gift and became partakers in the Holy Spirit 5 and tasted God’s good word and the powers of a future age, 6 and have gone off the track; men that are recrucifying the Son of God for themselves and making a spectacle of him.
7 For land that has drunk the rain which came repeatedly upon it and brings forth vegetation fit for the purposes of those on whose account it is worked enjoys a blessing from God, 8 but such as puts out thorns and thistles is worthless and close to a curse, coming in the end to burning.
9 But we are persuaded of better things about you, dear friends, and things that go with salvation, though we do speak thus.
10 For God is not unjust, to forget your work and the love you have displayed toward his name in the services you have rendered and are rendering to his people.
11 But we wish each of you might display the same earnestness with reference to certitude of hope to the end, 12 in order that you may not come out dullards but imitators of those who through faith and patience were granted the promises.
13 For in giving Abraham the promise God, since he had no way to swear by any greater, swore by himself 14 "Verily I will bless you and make you numerous. " 15 And thus when he had been patient he won the promise.
16 For men swear by the greater, and the oath is for them the assuring end of all contradiction; 17 which being so, God, wishing particularly to show the grantees of the promise the immutability of his plan, interposed with an oath, 18 in order that by two immutable things in which it is impossible for God to lie we might have a strong encouragement, we who have sought refuge in grasping the hope that lies before us.
19 Which hope we have as an anchor for the soul, safe and firm and going inside the curtain, 20 where Jesus went in for us in advance when he became high priest forever in such station as Melchisedek’s was.
7:1-28
7 For this Melchisedek, king of Salem, priest of God Most High, who came to meet Abraham as he returned from the defeat of the kings and blessed him, 2 to whom also Abraham apportioned a tithe of everything, translated, in the first place, "King of Righteousness, " and then also "king of Salem, " which is "king of peace, " 3 fatherless, motherless, pedigreeless, not having either a beginning of days or an end of life but put in like condition with the Son of God, remains a priest in perpetuity.
4 And see what a man this was, to whom Abraham, the founder of the nation, gave a tithe out of the spoils! 5 and those of the sons of Levi who receive the priesthood have orders to tithe the people in accordance with the law, that is, to tithe their brothers even though they have come out of Abraham’s loins; 6 but he who does not count his ancestry from them has tithed Abraham and blessed him who had the promises.
7 And beyond any dispute the lesser is blessed by the better.
8 And here men who die receive tithes, but there one who has it attested that he lives.
9 And, so to speak, through Abraham even Levi, he who receives tithes, has been tithed; 10 for he was still in his father’s loins when Melchisedek came to meet him.
11 So if perfection was attainable through the Levitical priesthood (for the people has its legislation on that basis), what more need was there that another priest be set up in such station as Melchisedek’s was and not be said to be in such station as Aaron’s? 12 for when the priesthood is shifted there necessarily comes a shift of law too.
13 For he of whom these things are said is a member of another tribe, from which nobody has tended the altar; 14 for it is a conspicuous fact that our Lord has arisen out of Judah, with reference to which tribe Moses spoke nothing about priests.
15 And it is all the more evident if in likeness to Melchisedek another priest is set up 16 who has become such not as determined by the law of a commandment for flesh but as determined by the power of indestructible life; 17 for he has the attestation "You are a priest forever in such station as Melchisedek’s was. "
18 For there ensues abrogation of a prior commandment because of its weakness and uselessness 19 (for the law did not complete anything) and introduction of a better hope through which we approach God.
20 And so far as regards its not being without the taking of an oath 21 (for those are priests made such without the taking of an oath, but he with the taking of an oath, through him who says to him "The Lord has sworn, and will not revoke it, ‘You are priest forever’ "), 22 to that extent has Jesus become guarantor of a better covenant.
23 And those have been a number of priests because prevented by death from staying in their place; 24 but he, because of remaining forever, has his priesthood inalienable, 25 wherefore he can totally save those who come to God through him, he being always alive to intercede for them.
26 For such a high priest was the right one for us, godly, innocent, unpolluted, separated from sinners and risen to be higher than the heavens, 27 who does not, like the high priests, have daily necessity to offer sacrifices first for his own sins, then for those of the people; for this he did once for all in making the offering of himself.
28 For the law appoints men as high priests, men who have weaknesses; but the oath-taking word that came after the law a Son, perfected forever.
8 And, the main point for what we are talking about, we have such a high priest as has taken his seat at the right hand of the throne of majesty in the heavens, 2 a ministrant of the true sanctuary and the true tent which the Lord pitched, not a man.
3 For every high priest is appointed to offer gifts and sacrifices; whence it is necessary that this one too should have something to offer.
4 If then he were on earth he would not be a priest at all, there being those who offer the gifts in accordance with the law, 5 who perform the service of a model and shadow of the heavenly, as Moses had the revelation made to him when he was going to execute the Tent; for it says "See that you make everything in conformity with the figure that was showed you on the mountain. " 6 But now he enjoys a more transcendent ministry insofar as he is also mediator of a better covenant which has its legislation on the basis of better promises.
7 For if that first one had been irreproachable there would be no looking for a place for a second.
8 For he says, reproaching them, "Here are days coming, says the Lord, that I will execute regarding the house of Israel and the house of Judah a new covenant 9 not like the covenant I made for their fathers on the day of my taking them by the hand to bring them out of Egypt, because they did not adhere to my covenant and I left them to themselves, says the Lord; 10 because this is the covenant I will establish for the house of Israel after those days, says the Lord, putting my laws into their mind and inscribing them on their hearts, and they shall have me for their God and I will have them for my people, 11 and they shall not be each teaching his fellow-citizen and each his brother ‘Know the Lord,’ because they shall all know me from the least to the greatest of them, 12 because I will be gracious to their wrong-doings and will no longer remember their sins. " 13 In saying "new " he has antiquated the first one; but what is being antiquated and showing its old age is somewhere near disappearance.
9:1-28
9 So the first one did have ordinances of service and its sanctuary of a mundane sort.
2 For a tent was constructed, the first one, in which the lampstand and the showbread were, which tent is designated as Holy, 3 and after the second curtain a tent, the one designated as Holiest of the Holy, 4 with a golden altar of incense and the ark of the covenant coated all over with gold, in which there were a gold jar holding the manna, and Aaron’s stick that sprouted, and the tablets of the covenant; 5 and up on top of it cherubim of glory shading the mercy-seat, about which things it is not practicable to tell in detail now.
6 And, these things being thus arranged, into the first tent the priests are all the time coming in to go through with the services, 7 but into the second the high priest only, once a year, not without blood which he offers for the people’s indiscretions, 8 what the Holy Spirit meant to express being this, that the way to the sanctuary had not yet been brought to light while the first tent was still standing.
9 Which is a parable for the present time; in keeping with which there are being offered gifts and sacrifices that cannot perfect the worshiper as to conscience, 10 only on the score of foods and drinks and different ablutions: ordinances for flesh, imposed till a time of rectification.
11 But when Christ arrived, high priest of good things that had come into existence, by way of the greater and more perfect tent, not man-made, that is, not of this creation, and not by virtue of blood of goats and steers but by his own blood, 12 he entered the holy place once for all, achieving an eternal redemption.
13 For if the blood of goats and bulls, and ashes of a heifer sprinkling the defiled, hallow one as regards the cleanness of the flesh, 14 how much more will the blood of the Christ, who by the working of an eternal Spirit offered himself as a faultless oblation to God, cleanse our conscience from the corpses of our deeds for worshiping a living God! 15 And this is why he is mediator of a new covenant, so that, a death having taken place to cancel the transgressions under the first covenant, those who had been called might receive the promised eternal inheritance.
16 For where there is a testament it is necessary that the testator’s death be put in evidence; 17 for it is for the affairs of the dead that a testament is valid, since when the testator is alive it is not at the time in effect.
18 Whence it comes that not even the first one was inaugurated without blood.
19 For after every commandment had been spoken to all the people by Moses in accordance with the law, he took the blood of the steers and goats with water and scarlet wool and marjoram and sprinkled the book itself and all the people, 20 saying "This is the blood of the covenant which God commanded for you. " 21 And he likewise sprinkled with the blood the tent and all the vessels for the services; 22 and, broadly speaking, according to the law everything is cleansed with blood, and without the shedding of blood no exoneration takes place.
23 So there is a necessity that the models of what is in the heavens be cleansed with these things but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices transcending these.
24 For it was not into a man-made sanctuary, a reproduction of the true one, that Christ went in, but into heaven itself, to appear in God’s presence now for us; 25 neither was it with a view to offering himself repeatedly as the high priest goes into the sanctuary year after year by another creature’s blood, 26 else he would have had to suffer over and over since the foundation of the world; but now it is once, at the culmination of the ages, that he has shown himself for the annulment of sin by his sacrifice.
27 And as surely as it is reserved for men to die once, but after this a judgment, 28 so too the Christ, offered once to take up the sins of many, will appear a second time, clear of sin, for salvation, to those who are awaiting him.
10:1-39
10 For the law, having a shadow of the future good, not the very image of the things, can never year by year with the same sacrifices, which they are offering, perfect in perpetuity those who come; 2 else would they not have ceased to be offered because the worshipers, once cleansed, would no longer have had sins on their conscience? 3 but in them there is a remembrance of sins year by year, 4 for it is impossible that blood of goats and bulls should take away sins; 5 for which reason as he comes into the world he says "Sacrifice and offering thou hadst no will for, but a body thou didst fit for me; 6 burnt-offerings and sin-offerings thou didst not approve.
7 Then I said ‘Here I come, in a roll of a book it is written of me, to do thy will, God.’ " 8 Saying above "Sacrifices and offerings and burnt-offerings and sin-offerings thou hadst no will for and didst not approve, " which are offered according to the law, 9 he has then said "Here I come to do thy will "; he abolishes the first to make good the second; 10 in which will we have been sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.
11 And every priest stands day by day performing his services and repeatedly offering the same sacrifices, which can never remove sins; 12 but this one, having offered one sacrifice for sins, took a seat in perpetuity at God’s right hand, 13 thenceforth waiting till his enemies be made the footstool for his feet, 14 for by one offering he has brought those who were to be sanctified into perfect status in perpetuity.
15 And the Holy Spirit too gives us testimony; for after having said 16 "this is the covenant I will establish for them after those days, says the Lord, putting my laws on their hearts and inscribing them on their mind, " 17 comes "and will no longer remember their sins and their wickednesses. " 18 But where there is exoneration from these there is no more offering of anything for sin.
19 So, brothers, having confidence for entrance into the sanctuary by Jesus’s blood, 20 which entrance he inaugurated for us, a fresh and living passage through the curtain (that is, his flesh), 21 and having a great priest over God’s house, 22 let us come with a true heart in certitude of faith, our hearts sprinkled from bad conscience and our bodies washed with clean water; 23 let us hold erect the profession of our faith, for he who made the promises is faithful, 24 and let us observe each other to stimulate us to love and good works, 25 not abandoning our assemblies as some have a way of doing, but cheering on; and the more as you see the day coming nearer.
26 For if we sin willfully after having had the recognition of the truth, there no longer remains a sacrifice for sins, 27 but a frightful waiting for judgment, and the jealousy of a fire that is to consume foes.
28 When one has disregarded Moses’s law he dies without mercy at two or three witnesses; 29 how much worse a penalty do you think he will be deemed to deserve who has trampled on the Son of God and has regarded as unholy the covenant blood by which he was sanctified and has affronted the Spirit of grace? 30 For we know who it was that said "Mine is vengeance; I will requite, " and again "The Lord will judge his people. " 31 It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of a living God.
32 But recollect the earlier days in which after you were given the light you held out through a hard grind of suffering, 33 for one thing being made a spectacle of with insults and distresses, and for another thing showing your solidarity with those who were leading such a life 34 for you shared the suffering of the imprisoned and accepted cheerfully the pillage of your property, knowing that you have better belongings that stay by you.
35 So do not throw up your confidence, which has great wages payable.
36 For staying power is what it takes, that after doing God’s will you may receive the fulfillment of the promise: 37 "for yet the least moment he who is coming will come and not be belated.
38 And my righteous man shall have life out of faith; and if he flinches my soul takes no satisfaction in him. " 39 And we are not for flinching that comes to destruction, but for faith that comes to soul-preservation.
11:1-40
11 And faith is assuming the validity of hopes, putting unseen things to the test.
2 For it is as to this the old-timers are vouched for.
3 It is by faith we apprehend that the worlds were set in order by a word of God’s, so that it is not out of observable things that what we see was made.
4 It was by faith Abel offered to God more of a sacrifice than Cain, through which he had himself attested to be righteous, God testifying over his gifts; and it is through it he still speaks after he dies.
5 It was by faith Enoch was translated so as not to see death, and was not to be found because God had translated him; for before the translation he was vouched for as having pleased God, 6 but without faith it is impossible to please; for he who comes to God has to believe that he is and that to those who seek him he proves a paymaster.
7 It was by faith Noah, receiving a revelation about what could not yet be seen, was on his guard and constructed an ark for the saving of his family, through which he pronounced condemnation on the world and became heir to the righteousness that comes in the way of faith.
8 It was by faith Abraham, when he was called, obeyed to go out to a place he was to get for an inheritance, and did go out, not knowing where he was going.
9 It was by faith he lived in an immigrant’s condition in the country he had the promise of as if in a country not his own, living in tents with Isaac and Jacob, the co-heirs of the same promise; 10 for he was waiting for the city that has the foundations, of which God is architect and artisan.
11 It was by faith Sarah herself too received power for founding a line of descendants even out of her time of life, since she regarded the giver of the promise as trustworthy; 12 because of which, also, there were born from one and one who had gone dead, at that descendants numerous as the stars in the sky or as the uncountable sand on the seashore.
13 In faith all these died, not having received the promised things but having seen and greeted them at a distance and avowed that on the earth they were strangers living away from their home.
14 For those who say things of that sort make it manifest that they are wanting a home.
15 And if they had been remembering that one from which they had gone out, they would have had a suitable time for going back; 16 but as it is, they are bent on a better one, that is, a heavenly one.
For which reason God is not ashamed of them, of being designated as their God; for he has got a city ready for them.
17 It was by faith Abraham, when put to the test, brought Isaac as a sacrifice, and he who had taken the promises to himself, 18 to whom the word had been spoken "it will be by Isaac that issue shall be called yours, " was sacrificing his only son, 19 counting on it that God is powerful enough to raise from the dead, wherefrom he did, figuratively speaking, receive him.
20 It was by faith, too, Isaac gave Jacob and Esau a blessing about future things.
21 It was by faith Jacob, when dying, blessed each of Joseph’s sons, and did reverence on the top of his staff.
22 It was by faith Joseph, when passing away, mentioned the coming out of the sons of Israel from Egypt and gave a command about his bones.
23 It was by faith Moses, when born, was hidden three months by his parents because they saw the child was a pretty one, and they were not afraid of the king’s order.
24 It was by faith Moses, when he grew up, renounced being known as Pharaoh’s daughter’s son, 25 choosing rather to share the hardships of God’s people than to have temporary enjoyment from a sin, 26 regarding the insults given to the Christ as a greater wealth than the treasures of Egypt; for he had his eye on the wages to be paid.
27 It was by faith he left Egypt, not fearing the king’s rage, for he bore up as seeing the Invisible One.
28 It was by faith he celebrated the passover and the application of the blood so that the destroyer of the firstborn should not touch them.
29 It was by faith they crossed the Red Sea as if along dry ground; attempting which, the Egyptians were swallowed up.
30 It was by faith the walls of Jericho fell after seven days of circling around them.
31 It was by faith Rahab the prostitute did not perish with those who had been disobedient, she having received the spies with peace.
32 And why say more? for the time will fail me as I tell about Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephthah, and David and Samuel and the prophets, 33 who through faith put down kingdoms, did service to the right, won promises, stopped lions’ mouths, 34 quenched the power of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, were brought to powerfulness from weakness, became strong in war, routed camps of aliens.
35 Women received their dead in resurrection; and others were beaten to death and did not accept a chance of getting off, in order that a better resurrection might be theirs; 36 and others experienced derisive indignities and lashes, and chains and prison life moreover.
37 They were stoned, sawed in two, put to the sword; they went about in sheepskins, in goatskins, suffering want, distress, hardship, 38 they of whom the world was not worthy, wandering in deserts and mountains and caves and holes in the ground.
39 And all these, though by faith they had themselves vouched for, did not receive what was promised, 40 as God looked forward to something better regarding us, so that they were not to come to completeness apart from us.
12:1-29
12 Consequently let us too, having around us such a cloud of witnesses, take off everything heavy, and trammeling sin, and run steadily the race that lies before us, 2 looking to him who led the way in faith and brought it to completeness, Jesus, who for the joy that lay before him endured a cross, despising shame, and has taken his seat at the right hand of God’s throne.
3 For think over the case of him who has endured such opposition from sinners against themselves, so that you may not lose your nerve and give out.
4 You have not yet stood up to your fight with sin till the blood ran; 5 and you have forgotten the exhortation which reasons with you as sons, "My son, do not slight the Lord’s discipline nor be disheartened when you are corrected by him, 6 for it is the one the Lord loves that he disciplines, and he whips every son that he accepts. " 7 It is for discipline that you have trials to endure; God is treating you as sons; for what son is there that a father does not discipline? 8 but if you are without discipline, of which all have had their share, then you are bastards and not sons.
9 And then, we had our bodily fathers as disciplinarians and stood in awe of them; shall we not much more be submissive to the Father of spirits, and live? 10 For they disciplined us for a few days as they saw fit, but he for our advantage so that we shall partake of his holiness.
11 Any discipline does not in its present aspect seem to be a thing for gladness but for pain; but afterward it yields a peaceful fruit to those who have had their training by it, the fruit of righteousness.
12 Wherefore, brace up the unstrung hands and the palsied knees, 13 and make straight tracks for your feet, in order that what is lame may not get a sprain but may rather heal up.
14 Aim at peace with everyone, and sanctification (without which nobody will see the Lord), 15 having an eye to it that nobody coming short of God’s grace, no root of bitterness sending up its sprout, shall make trouble and thereby the rank and file be polluted, 16 no libertine or unsanctified man like Esau, who for one meal sold his rights as eldest son; 17 for you know how when he did afterward want to inherit the blessing he was ruled out; for he did not find a chance to change his mind though he tried for it in tears.
18 For you have not come to something tangible and burned with fire and to darkness and gloom and thick air, 19 and trumpet-tone, and such a sound of words that the hearers declined to have more said to them, 20 for they could not bear the charge that was given, "if even a beast touches the mountain it shall be stoned, " 21 and, so fearful was the display, Moses said "I quail and quiver "; 22 but you have come to Mount Sion and the city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem, and tens of thousands of angels 23 in festival throng, and a church of firstborn sons registered in heaven, and God the Judge of all, and the spirits of perfected saints, 24 and Jesus the mediator of a new covenant, and a blood of sprinkling that speaks better than Abel’s.
25 See to it that you do not decline him who speaks; for if those did not escape when they had on earth declined him who was giving the revelation, much more we, who turn our backs on him who is doing it from heaven, 26 whose voice shook the earth then, but now he has promised "One time more I will shake not only the earth but the sky too. " 27 And "one time more " expresses the displacement of the shaken things as of things that have been made, in order that the unshaken may remain. 28 Wherefore, raised to the throne of an unshakable empire, let us have a thankful spirit, through which we shall worship God acceptably; with reverence and fear 29 for our God is a consuming fire.
13:1-25
13 Let brotherliness persist.
2 Do not forget hospitableness, for by it some men had angels as guests before they knew it.
3 Remember those in prison, as being fellow-prisoners; those in hardship, as being in a body yourselves.
4 Marriage, highly honored in all respects, and the bed unpolluted; for God will judge libertines and adulterers.
5 Character, unmercenary; getting along with what there is on hand, for he himself has said "I will not neglect you nor abandon you, " 6 so that we can say stoutly "I have the Lord as helper and will not be frightened; what is a man to do to me? "
7 Be mindful of your leaders who spoke God’s word to you; whose faith imitate, viewing the way they passed out of the life they had led.
8 Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today, and forever.
9 Do not be swept along with miscellaneous peculiar doctrines; for it is a good thing that the heart be held firm by grace not by foods, in which those who concern themselves with them did not get any benefit.
10 We have an altar from which those who perform the service of the tabernacle have no right to eat.
11 For when the blood of animals is brought into the holy place by the high priest on account of sin, the bodies of these are burned up outside the camp; 12 for which reason so did Jesus, in order to sanctify the people by his own blood, suffer outside the gate; 13 well, then, let us come out to him outside the camp, bearing his ignominy.
14 For we do not have a permanent city here, but are trying for the future one.
15 Through him let us offer a sacrifice of praise to God all the time; that is, the fruit of lips making acknowledgments to his name.
16 And do not forget beneficence and solidarity; for with such sacrifices God is pleased.
17 Obey your leaders and defer to them, for they are on the alert night and day in behalf of your souls, expecting to have to account for them; in order that they may do that with gladness, not with groans, for this would not pay you.
18 Pray for us; for we are persuaded that we have a good conscience, intending to lead a good life in every respect.
19 And I more especially urge you to do this in order that I may be restored to you the more quickly.
20 And may the God of peace, who by virtue of the blood of an eternal covenant brought up from the dead the great Shepherd of the sheep, our Lord Jesus, 21 make you fit in every good quality for doing his will, bringing about in you what shall be pleasing before him through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory forever and ever; amen.
22 But I beg you, brothers, take the word of exhortation in good part for I have given you a short letter.
23 Know that our brother Timothy has been released; with whom, if he comes pretty soon, I will see you.
24 Give my greetings to all your leaders and all God’s people.
The brothers from Italy send you greetings.
25 Grace be with you all.
James
1:1-27
1 James, servant of God and the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes abroad, greeting.
2 Think it all gladness, my brothers, when you fall into varied temptations, 3 knowing that the test of your faith produces steadfastness.
4 And let steadfastness take complete effect, that you may be complete, sound all over, not lacking in any respect.
5 But if one of you is lacking in wisdom let him ask of the God who gives wholeheartedly to all and says no more about it.
6 But let him ask in faith, without any doubting; for one who doubts is like a swell at sea blown about and tossing.
7 For let not that man think that he will get anything from the Lord 8 a man of two minds, fickle in all his courses.
9 But let the lowly brother glory in his loftiness, 10 and the rich in his lowliness, because he shall pass away like field flowers.
11 For the sun rises with the hot wind, and dries up the plants, and their flowers fall off and the beauty of their faces is gone; so the rich man too shall wither in his wayfarings.
12 Happy is the man who endures temptation, because when he has stood the test he shall receive the wreath of life which God has promised to those who love him.
13 Let no one, when he is tempted, say "I am being tempted by God "; for God feels no temptations to evil, and himself tempts nobody.
14 But each one is tempted by being enticed and allured by his own desire; 15 then desire becomes pregnant and gives birth to sin, and sin grows up and brings forth its offspring death.
16 Do not be misled, my dear brothers.
17 Every good giving, every perfect gift, is from above, coming down from the Father of Lights, with whom there is no such thing as a variation or the shadowing of a turn.
18 Purposely did he, by the word of truth, bring us forth as his offspring, to the end that we should be a sort of firstfruits of his creatures.
19 You know it, my dear brothers. But let every man be quick to hear, slow to speak, slow to anger; 20 for man’s anger does not practice God’s righteousness.
21 Wherefore, laying off all befoulment and profusion of malice, receive in meekness the implanted word that is able to save your souls.
22 But be doers of words, and not merely self-cheating hearers; 23 because whoever is a hearer of a word and not a doer, he is like a man looking in a glass at the face he was born with; 24 for he looks at himself and goes off and forgets at once what he was like.
25 But he who gazes into the perfect law, the law of liberty, and stays by it, not showing himself a forgetful hearer but a doer in act, happy shall he be in his doing.
26 If one thinks himself devout while not bridling his tongue but deceiving his own heart, that man’s devotions are futile.
27 Pure and undefiled devotions in the eyes of God the Father are these: to look after orphans and widows in their distress; to keep one’s self unspotted from the world.
2 My brothers, let it not be with partiality that you hold the faith of our Lord of glory Jesus Christ. 2 For if there comes into a synagogue of yours a man with a gold ring, in splendid dress, and there comes in also a poor man in soiled dress, 3 and you take notice of the one who wears the splendid dress and say "You sit here in a good place, " and say to the poor man "You stand there, or sit under my footstool, " 4 are you not in conflict with yourselves, and have you not shown yourselves judges swayed by base influences? 5 Listen, my dear brothers: did not God choose those who are poor as to the world to be rich in faith and heirs of the royalty which he promised to those who love him? 6 but you have dishonored the poor man.
Do not the rich tyrannize over you and do not they drag you before tribunals? 7 do not they blaspheme the goodly name by which you are called?
8 If, however, you fulfill the royal law according to the text "You shall love your neighbor as yourself, " you do well; 9 but if you show partiality you are practicing sin, being convicted by the law as violators.
10 For whoever keeps the whole law but makes a slip in one point has become guilty of all.
11 For he who said "Do not commit adultery " said also "Do not murder "; and if you do not commit adultery but do commit murder you have become a violator of the law.
12 So speak, and so do, as men who are to be judged by a law of liberty.
13 For justice is pitiless to him who has not showed pity; pity flouts justice.
14 What is the use, my brothers, if one says he has faith, but does not have deeds? can faith save him? 15 If a brother or sister be naked and in lack of daily food, 16 and one of you say to them "Good luck to you, keep warm and eat heartily, " but you do not give them what is requisite for the body, what is the use? 17 just so faith, if it does not have deeds, is dead in itself.
18 But a man will say "You have faith and I have deeds; show me your faith without deeds, and I will show you my faith by my deeds.
19 You believe that there is one God? you do well: the demons too believe, and shiver.
20 But do you want to know, hollow man, that faith without deeds is idle? 21 Was not Father Abraham justified by deeds, in that he sacrificed his son Isaac on the altar? 22 do you perceive that faith cooperated with his deeds, and faith was perfected by deeds? 23 and the text which says ‘And Abraham believed God, and it was counted as righteousness for him, and he was called God’s friend’ was fulfilled. " 24 You see that a man is justified by deeds and not by faith alone.
25 And in the same way was not Rahab the prostitute justified by deeds, when she took in the messengers and sent them out another way? 26 For as the body without a spirit is dead, so also faith without deeds is dead.
3 Do not many of you be teachers, my brothers, knowing that we shall come under greater responsibility.
2 For we one and all make many slips.
If anyone does not slip in speech, that man is a complete man, able to bridle the whole body too.
3 And if we put bits in horses’ mouths to have them obey us, we bring around their whole body too.
4 Ships also, great as they are and driven by hard winds, are brought around by a little helm whichever way the steersman’s push will have it.
5 So is the tongue a small organ and boasts a great record. What a great forest the least bit of fire will kindle! and the tongue is a fire.
6 The tongue is set among our organs as the world of wrong, what spots the whole body and sets aflame the wheel of birth and is set aflame by hell.
7 For every species of beasts and of birds, and of reptiles and the creatures of the sea, is and has been subdued by the human species; 8 but the tongue no human being can subdue, unquiet evil that it is, full of death-dealing venom.
9 With it we bless our Lord and Father, and with it we curse men, who are made in the likeness of God: 10 out of the same mouth come blessing and curse; my brothers, these things ought not to be so done.
11 Does a spring flow sweet and bitter out of the same orifice? 12 can a fig-tree, my brothers, produce olives, or a grapevine figs? neither can salt water produce sweet.
13 Who is there among you that is wise and intelligent? let him show his deeds out of a good life, in meekness of wisdom.
14 But if you have bitter jealousy and contest in your hearts, do not flout the truth and tell lies against it.
15 This wisdom is not heaven-descended but terrestrial, animal, fiendlike; 16 for where jealousy and contests are, there is disorder and every faulty action.
17 But the heaven-descended wisdom is first pure, then peaceable, reasonable, tractable, full of pity and good fruits, with no misgivings and no insincerities; 18 and fruit of righteousness is sowed in peace for those who make peace.
4:1-17
4 What is the origin of wars and fightings among you? is it not this, your pleasures campaigning in your organism? 2 You desire and do not have, you murder and are jealous and cannot obtain you fight and make war.
You do not have because you do not ask; 3 you ask and do not get because you ask wrongly, to spend it in your pleasures.
4 Adulteresses, do you not know that friendship to the world is enmity to God? so anyone who wishes to be a friend of the world becomes, as such, an enemy of God.
5 Or do you think it is meaninglessly that the text says "The spirit that he has housed in us longs enviously "? 6 But he gives a greater grace; for which reason it says "God sets himself against the proud but gives grace to the lowly. " 7 So be submissive to God; but stand up against the devil and he will run from you.
8 Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you.
Clean your hands, sinners, and purify your hearts, men of two minds; 9 be miserable, and mourn, and weep; let your laughter be turned to mourning and your gladness to abasement.
10 Humble yourselves before the Lord, and he will uplift you.
11 Do not talk disparagingly of each other, brothers.
He who disparages or judges his brother is disparaging and judging the law; and if you judge the law you are not a doer of the law but a judge.
12 There is one lawgiver and judge, he who can save and can destroy; but who are you, you who judge your neighbor?
13 Come now, you who say "Today or tomorrow we will go to such a city and spend a year there and trade and make profits " 14 when you do not know what the future holds; for what is your life? for you are vapor, that appears for a little while and then just disappears 15 instead of saying "If the Lord will we shall both live and do this or that. " 16 But now you are glorying in your great claims; any such glorying is wicked.
17 So, when one knows enough to do right and does not, it is a sin of his.
5:1-20
5 Come on now, rich men, weep and howl over your miseries to come.
2 Your wealth has rotted and your garments have become moth-eaten, 3 your gold and silver have rusted and their rust will be a testimony to you and will eat your flesh like fire.
4 You have been hoarding in the last days; here the delayed pay of the laborers who reaped your acres is crying out, and the clamor of the harvesters has entered the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth.
5 You have been living in luxury and self-indulgence on the earth, you have been feeding your hearts in a day of slaughter; 6 you have been condemning the man who was in the right, murdering him he does not make any stand against you.
7 So, brothers, have patience till the Lord’s coming.
How the farmer waits for the precious crops of the soil, having patience over them till they get the early rains and the late rains! 8 Have patience yourselves, fortify your hearts, because the Lord’s coming is almost here.
9 Do not sigh against each other, brothers, that you may not be judged: here is the judge standing at the doors.
10 Take as an example of fortitude and patience, brothers, the prophets who spoke in the name of the Lord.
11 How we admire the condition of those who endured! you have heard of Job’s endurance, and seen the Lord’s ending, that the Lord is tenderhearted and compassionate.
12 And above all, my brothers, do not swear, neither by heaven nor by the earth nor any other oath; but let your yes be yes and your no no, that you may not come under judgment.
13 Is anyone among you having hardships? let him pray.
Is anyone feeling cheery? let him sing hymns.
14 Is anyone among you sick? let him call in the elders of the church, and let them pray over him, putting oil on him in the name of the Lord, 15 and the prayer of faith shall make the sufferer well, and the Lord shall raise him; and if he has committed sins he shall be forgiven.
16 So confess your sins to each other and pray for each other that you may be healed.
Great is the efficacy of a righteous man’s strenuous prayer.
17 Elijah was a man subject to the same limitations as we are, and he specially prayed that it might not rain, and it did not rain on the earth three years and six months; 18 and he prayed again and the sky gave showers and the earth started to grow crops.
19 My brothers, if one among you strays from the truth and someone brings him back, 20 let him know that he who brings a sinner back from his straying course will save him from death and cover a multitude of sins.
1 Peter
1 Peter, apostle of Jesus Christ, to the chosen who are living abroad among the Jewish colonies of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, 2 according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, in sanctification of the Spirit, to obedience and sprinkling of Jesus Christ’s blood: Grace and peace be yours in abundance.
3 Blessed be our Lord Jesus Christ’s God and Father, he who in accordance with his great mercy has given us rebirth into a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, 4 into an imperishable, undefiled, unfading inheritance that has been kept in heaven for you 5 who by the power of God are guarded through faith for a salvation ready to be disclosed at the last 6 wherein you exult, though for a little while now, if need be, you have been saddened in various trials, 7 that the quality of your faith may be found more valuable than gold (which is a perishable thing, but is tested by fire) for praise and glory and honor at the manifestation of Jesus Christ, 8 whom you love without having seen him; believing in whom, without now seeing him, you exult in ineffable and glorified gladness, 9 obtaining the end of faith, soul-salvation.
10 Concerning which salvation prophets sought and searched, who prophesied of the grace that has reached you, 11 searching to find out what time or what sort of time Christ’s spirit in them was pointing to in testifying beforehand the sufferings to which Christ was destined and the glory after these; 12 to whom it was disclosed that they were dispensing them not to themselves but to you, the things that have now been announced to you through those who brought the gospel to you in the Holy Spirit sent from heaven, things that angels desire to look into.
13 Wherefore, girding up the loins of your mind, keep absolutely sober and hope in the grace that is being brought you in the manifestation of Jesus Christ.
14 Like children of obedience, not conforming to your old-time desires that you had during your ignorance, 15 but like the Holy One who called you, be holy yourselves in all your life, 16 since it is written "You shall be holy, because I am holy. " 17 And if you invoke a Father who judges impartially according to each one’s doing, live a life of fear for the time of your stay, 18 knowing that it was not with perishable things, silver or gold, that you were redeemed from the futile life your fathers handed down to you, 19 but with precious blood as if of a lamb without defect or spot, Christ’s blood, 20 who had been foreknown before the foundation of the world but had made his appearance at the latter end of time for the sake of you 21 who through him are believers in God who raised him from the dead and gave him glory, so that your faith and hope are in God.
22 Having purified your spirits by obedience to the truth for unfeigned brotherliness, love each other ardently from your hearts, 23 reborn not from perishable seed but from imperishable, through the living word of God living and abiding, 24 because "all flesh is like the herbage of the field, and all its glory like field flowers: the herbage withers and the flowers fall off; 25 but the word of the Lord abides forever, " and this is the word that has been brought to you as gospel.
2 So, laying off all malice and all trickery, and insincerities and grudges and all detraction, 2 long like newborn babies for unadulterated intellectual milk, that on it you may grow to salvation, 3 if you have tasted that the Lord is kind; 4 coming to whom, a living stone condemned by men but in God’s estimation select and noble, 5 you too as living stones are being built to a spiritual house, for a holy priesthood to offer spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.
6 Because there is a text where it reads "Here I am laying in Sion a noble select crowning-stone, and he who believes on him shall not be put to shame. " 7 So the nobility is for you believers; but for disbelievers "The stone that the builders condemned, that stone has come to be the top of the corner " 8 and "a stone to strike against, a rock to stumble over " who stumble by disobeying the word; which is what they were set for.
9 But you are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for preservation, that you may publish the merits of him who called you out of darkness into his wonderful light 10 you who had once been No Nation but are God’s nation now, who had been Unpitied but have now had pity taken on you.
11 Dear friends, I exhort you, as men living abroad among an alien race, to abstain from fleshly desires, which wage a war against the soul, 12 and to keep up a good life among the foreigners, that where they decry you as evil-doers they may in consequence of your good deeds, as they watch them, glorify God on the day of visitation.
13 Be submissive to every human institution for the Lord’s sake, whether to the emperor as sovereign 14 or to governors as sent through him for punishment of evil-doers and praise of right-doers, 15 because such is God’s will, that by doing right you should silence senseless men’s ignorance; 16 as freemen, and not as having freedom for a cover to viciousness, but as servants of God.
17 Honor everybody; love the brotherhood; fear God; honor the emperor.
18 Domestics, be submissive to your masters in all fear, not only to the kind and reasonable but also to the cranky; 19 for it is a credit if one bears troubles for the consciousness of God, when one suffers unjustly.
20 For what is there grand about it if you endure when you do wrong and are cuffed? but if you endure when you do right and suffer, that is a credit with God.
21 For this is what you were called for, because Christ too suffered on your account, leaving behind a pattern for you that you might follow in his track 22 he who did no sin, nor was trickery found in his mouth; 23 who did not answer with abuse when he was abused, did not make threats when he suffered, but committed his case to him who judges justly; 24 who himself carried our sins up to the tree in his body, that we might perish to sins and live to righteousness; by whose stripes you have been healed, 25 for you were like sheep astray, but you have now turned back to the Shepherd and Visitor of your souls.
3:1-22
3 Likewise, wives, be submissive to your husbands, so that even if some are disobedient to the word they shall through their wives’ life be won without words 2 when they watch your pure life lived in fear.
3 And be yours not the outward adornment of plaiting hair and wearing jewels or putting on dresses, 4 but the secret person of the heart in the imperishable adornment of a meek and quiet spirit, which is worth a fortune before God.
5 For so in former times did the holy women who hoped in God adorn themselves, submitting to their husbands, 6 as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him "lord "; whose children you have become when you do right and fear no terror.
7 Husbands likewise, live intelligently with womankind as a weaker thing, according them honor as co-heirs in the grace of life, so as not to have your prayers hindered.
8 And finally, all be united, sympathizing, brother-loving, kindly, humble, 9 not paying back hurt for hurt or abuse for abuse, but contrariwise blessing everybody; because this is what you were called for, that you might inherit a blessing.
10 For "he who would love life and see good days, let him stop his tongue from evil and his lips from speaking deceit, 11 and let him shun evil and do the good, seek peace and pursue it; 12 because the Lord’s eyes are upon the righteous and his ears are toward their petition, but the Lord’s face is against the doers of evil. " 13 And who is it that will harm you if you show yourselves zealous for good?
14 But if you do suffer for right-doing, happy are you; and do not stand in fear of them, nor be agitated, 15 but "magnify in your hearts the holiness of the Lord " (Christ), always ready to make your defense to anyone who asks you to give an account of the hope you have in you, but with meekness and fear, 16 keeping a good conscience, that where you are decried those who are spiteful toward your good life in Christ may be put to shame.
17 For it is better, if God’s will will have it so, to suffer in doing right than in doing wrong; 18 because so did Christ suffer for sins once, a saint for guilty men, to bring you to God, being put to death in flesh, but given life in spirit 19 while he went and preached to the spirits in prison too, 20 that had once disobeyed when in Noah’s days God’s patience was waiting while an ark was being constructed, into which a few, that is eight souls, came safe through water 21 what in the antitype is now saving you too, baptism, not flesh’s taking off grime but a good conscience’s inquiry after God, saving you through the resurrection of Jesus Christ, 22 who is at God’s right hand, gone to heaven, with angels and authorities and powers put under his control.
4:1-19
4 So, since Christ has suffered in flesh, arm yourselves too with that same thought, because he who has suffered in flesh has come to a stop in sins; 2 so as to live your remaining time in the flesh no longer by men’s desires but by the will of God.
3 For the bygone time is enough for having done the wish of the nations, going along in immoralities, lusts, hard drinkings, revels, carousals, and unholy idolatries, 4 in which business they find it surprising that you do not run with them into the same inundation of debauchery, and they vilify you; 5 but they shall account for it to him who is in readiness to judge living and dead.
6 For it was for this that even dead men had the gospel preached to them, that they might be judged men’s way in flesh, but live God’s way in spirit.
7 But the end of everything is almost here; so be sane, and keep sober for prayers, 8 above all having your love to each other ardent, because love covers a multitude of sins; 9 hospitable toward each other without grumbling; 10 as each has received a grant, giving each other the benefit of it as good stewards of God’s diversified grace: 11 if one speaks, speaking as communications of God; if one renders services, doing it as out of strength that God furnishes; that in everything God may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom belong glory and might forever and ever amen.
12 Dear friends, do not be taken by surprise at the fiery ordeal among you coming upon you for a test, as if a surprising thing were happening to you, 13 but, insofar as you are solidary with the Christ’s sufferings, be glad, that at the manifestation of his glory too you may exultantly be glad.
14 If you are twitted with Christ’s name, happy are you, because the Spirit of glory, the Spirit of God, is resting on you.
15 For let no one of you suffer as a murderer or a thief or a doer of any harm, or as an intruder into other people’s concerns; 16 but if it is as a Christian let him not be ashamed, but glorify God for that name 17 because it is time for judgment to begin with the house of God; and if it begins first with you, what is to be the end of those who disobey God’s gospel? 18 and if the honest man barely gets through, where will the impious sinner appear? 19 Hence let those also who suffer according to God’s will commit their souls in right-doing to a faithful Creator.
5 So I exhort elders among you, I a fellow-elder and a witness to the Christ’s sufferings, a sharer too in the glory that is to be disclosed, 2 shepherd God’s flock that you have among you, not as a matter of compulsion, but willingly, God’s way; not mercenarily, but enthusiastically; 3 and not as lording it over the parishes, but setting an example to the flock; 4 and when the Head Shepherd makes his appearance you shall obtain the amaranth-wreath of glory.
5 Likewise, juniors, be submissive to elders; and all of you wear toward each other the livery of humility, because "God sets himself against the proud but gives grace to the lowly. "
6 So humble yourselves under God’s mighty hand that he may uplift you in due time, 7 throwing all your anxiety on him, because he cares for you.
8 Keep sober; keep awake.
Your antagonist the Devil is walking around, like a roaring lion, looking for somebody to swallow down; 9 stand firm against him, solid in faith, knowing that the same series of sufferings is being gone through by your brotherhood in the world.
10 And the God of all grace, he who in Christ called you to his eternal glory, will himself, after you have suffered a little while, look after your soundness, firmness, strength, foundation.
11 To him belongs might forever and ever amen.
12 By Silvanus, our faithful brother as I reckon him to be, I write you these few words to exhort you and testify to you that this is the veritable grace of God, in which stand firm.
13 Your sister in election at Babylon sends greetings, and my son Mark.
14 Give my greetings to each other with a kiss of love.
Peace to you all, all that are in Christ.
2 Peter
1:1-21
1 Symeon Peter, servant and apostle of Jesus Christ, to those whose lot it has been in the justice of our God and Savior Jesus Christ to have as rich a faith as ours: 2 grace be yours in abundance, and peace, in awareness of God and of Jesus our Lord, 3 as his divine power has bestowed all the conditions for life and piety upon us through awareness of him who called us by his own glory and virtue, 4 through which we have the precious and immense promises bestowed on us, that by these you may become sharers in divine nature, having made your escape from the ruin by desire which is in the world.
5 And on this very account bring all your energies to bear and furnish virtue in your faith, and knowledge in your virtue, 6 and self-restraint in your knowledge, and endurance in your self-restraint, and piety in your endurance, 7 and brotherliness in your piety, and love in your brotherliness; 8 for if you possess these things, and plenty of them, they render you not idle nor unfruitful toward awareness of our Lord Jesus Christ.
9 For he who does not have these things about him is blindly nearsighted, oblivious of the purgation of his old-time sins.
10 Wherefore take the more pains, brothers, to make your call and election sure; for, doing this, you shall never stumble; 11 for thus shall be richly furnished to you the ingress into the eternal reign of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
12 Wherefore I shall ever be reminding you about these things, even though you know and are firmly settled in the truth you have with you; 13 but I think it right, so long as I am in this tabernacle, to rouse you with reminders, 14 knowing that the laying off of my tabernacle is speedily due, as our Lord Jesus Christ too declared to me; 15 and I will also do my best that after my departure you may at every time be able to call these things to mind.
16 For we were not echoing trumped-up myths when we made known to you the power and advent of our Lord Jesus Christ, but had been eyewitnesses of his grandeur.
17 For as he received honor and glory from God the Father, when such a voice as this came wafted to him by the sublime glory, "My dear son is this, in whom I take pleasure, " 18 and this voice we heard come wafted from the skies when we were with him on the sacred mountain.
19 And we have a surer thing, the word of prophecy, to which you do well to be attentive, as if to a lamp in a murky place, till day shall flush the sky and the Morning Star shall rise in your hearts 20 knowing this in the first place, that any prophecy in a text is not a matter for particular interpretation; 21 for not by will of man was prophecy ever wafted to us, but, wafted by Holy Spirit, men spoke from God.
2 But there came pretended prophets too among the people, the same as among you too shall be pretendant teachers who shall introduce ruinous ideologies, repudiating the very Master that bought them, bringing upon themselves a speedy bane; 2 and many will follow the example of their immoralities, because of whom the path of truth will be vilified; 3 and with rapacious intent they will exploit you by well-turned phrases men for whom judgment is not inert from of old, and their bane is not napping.
4 For if God did not spare angels when they sinned, but, engulfing them in Inferno’s pits of darkness, committed them to be kept for judgment, 5 and did not spare the primitive world, but reserved among seven others Noah, preacher of righteousness, while bringing a deluge upon the world of the impious, and, 6 laying in ashes the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, doomed them to obliteration, making them the example of men who should act impiously, 7 and delivered honest Lot, irked by the immoral living of the conscienceless, 8 for with sight and hearing the honest man, residing among them, day by day tortured his honest soul with their lawless deeds, 9 the Lord knows how to deliver pious men out of temptation but to keep doers of wrong under punishment to the day of judgment, 10 and especially those who go after flesh in desire for pollution and despise lordship.
Cynically audacious, they do not quail at vilifying glories, 11 when angels, superior in strength and power, do not bring a defamatory charge against them before the Lord.
12 But these, like brute beasts, creatures of nature born to be caught and to perish, vilifying what they are ignorant of, shall perish too in their undoing, 13 suffering injury in payment for injuriousness.
Taking luxury for the day as their idea of pleasure, blots and blemishes, luxuriating in their deceits while they feast with you, 14 with eyes full of a paramour who is another man’s wife and unresting in sin, luring unsteady souls, their hearts expert in greed, children of a curse, 15 they left the straight road and strayed, treading over again the road of Balaam the son of Beor, who fell in love with the pay of wrong-doing 16 but he had evidence of his dereliction: a dumb beast, speaking with a man’s voice, checked the prophet’s craziness.
17 These are waterless springs and wind-driven puffs of mist, for whom the blackness of darkness is kept.
18 For, uttering extravagant futilities, they lure with the desires of flesh, with debaucheries, those who are making a narrow escape from those that live a life of misguided wanderings, 19 promising them liberty when they themselves are slaves of vice; for what one is beaten by he is enslaved to.
20 For if they make their escape from the pollutions of the world by awareness of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and are entangled in them again and beaten, they have the last turn out worse than the first; 21 for it would have been better for them not to been aware of the path of righteousness than after being aware of it to revert from the holy commandment that had been transmitted to them.
22 They have been through what the true proverb speaks of, "A dog turning back to its own vomit, and a bathed hog to wallowing in mud. "
3 This, dear friends, is the second letter I am writing you, in which letters I am rousing your candid minds with reminders 2 to remember the words spoken beforehand by the holy prophets and the injunction of your Lord and Savior’s apostles 3 knowing this in the first place, that in the last days mockers will come with mockeries, going by their own desires 4 and saying "Where is the promise of his advent? for since the fathers went to their rest everything has remained as it was since the beginning of creation. " 5 For this they willfully ignore, that there were heavens from of old, and an earth, by the word of God compacted out of water and by water, 6 whereby the world of that time met its bane by being flooded with water, 7 but the present heavens and earth are by the same word stored with fire and kept for a day of judgment and the bane of impious men.
8 But do not you ignore this, dear friends, that with the Lord one day is like a thousand years, and a thousand years like one day.
9 The Lord is not lagging back from his promise, as some take it for a lagging, but is having patience with you, not wishing that any should perish but that all should go to repenting.
10 But the Day of the Lord will come like a thief, the day on which the heavens will whiz away and the heavenly bodies will be parched and disintegrated, and earth and the works in it will be fuel for fire.
11 When all these things are thus to disintegrate, what men ought you to be in holy lives and pious acts, 12 expecting and speeding the advent of the Day of God, at which the heavens will disintegrate in fire, and the heavenly bodies parch and melt; 13 but in accordance with his promise we expect new heavens and a new earth, in which righteousness resides.
14 Wherefore, dear friends, having these expectations, do your best to have him find you spotless and unblamable in peace, 15 and deem our Lord’s patience your salvation, just as our dear brother Paul too wrote to you in accordance with the wisdom given to him, 16 the same as he does in all his letters, speaking in them of these things.
In which letters there are some things hard to understand, which the ignorant and unsteady twist, the same as they do the rest of the scriptures, to their own bane.
17 So for your part, dear friends, being forewarned, keep on your guard against being carried along with the wanderings of the conscienceless and falling away from your own steadiness, 18 but grow in grace and the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
To him be glory both now and to eternity’s day.
1 John
1 What from the first there was, what we have heard, what we have seen with our own eyes, what we have gazed upon and our hands have handled, about the Word of life 2 and the life made its appearance, and we have seen and are testifying and reporting to you the eternal life which was where the Father is and made its appearance to us 3 what we have seen and heard we are reporting to you too in order that you too may have solidarity with us.
And, too, our solidarity is with the Father and with his son Jesus Christ.
4 And these things we are writing to you in order that our happiness may be made full.
5 And this is the message we have heard from him and are announcing to you, that God is light and there is in him no darkness whatever.
6 If we say we have solidarity with him and are walking in the darkness, we are lying and not living up to the truth.
7 But if we are walking in the light, as he is in the light, we have solidarity with each other, and the blood of his son Jesus cleanses us from every sin.
8 If we say we do not have a sin, we are deluding ourselves and the truth is not in us; 9 if we acknowledge our sins, he is loyal and fair to forgive us our sins and cleanse us from every wrongness.
10 If we say we have not sinned we are making him a liar and his word is not in us.
2 My children, I am writing you these things in order that you may not sin; and if one sins, we have a spokesman to the Father, Jesus Christ, a righteous one; 2 and he is a propitiation for our sins, and not only for ours but also for the whole world’s.
3 It is by this we know that we know him, if we keep his commandments.
4 He who says "I know him " and does not keep his commandments is a liar; in that man the truth is not; 5 but whoever keeps his word, in him God’s love does really come to its completion.
It is by this we know that we are in him: 6 he who says he is dwelling in him ought himself to be walking in the same way as he walked.
7 Dear friends, it is not a new commandment I am writing you, but an old commandment that you had from the first: the old commandment is the word you did hear.
8 Again, it is a new commandment I am writing you; this is true as to him and as to you, because the darkness is passing and now the true light is shining.
9 He who says he is in the light and hates his brother is in the darkness up to now; 10 he who loves his brother is dwelling in the light, and there is nothing in him to bring him to a downfall, 11 but he who hates his brother is in the darkness and is walking in the darkness, and does not know where he is going because the darkness has blinded his eyes.
12 I am writing to you, children, because your sins are forgiven you on account of his name.
13 I am writing to you, fathers, because you know the one that has been from the first.
I am writing to you, youths, because you have won victories over the Evil One.
I have written to you, boys, because you know the Father.
14 I have written to you, fathers, because you know the one that has been from the first.
I have written to you, youths, because you are strong and God’s word dwells in you and you have won victories over the Evil One.
15 Do not love the world nor what is in the world.
If one loves the world the love of the Father is not in him, 16 because all that is in the world, the desire of the flesh and the desire of the eyes and the pretentiousness of our life, does not come from the Father but comes from the world; 17 and the world passes, and so does the desire of it, but he who does God’s will remains forever.
18 It is the last moment, boys; and as you have heard that there is an antichrist coming, so there have now come to be many antichrists, from which we know that it is the last moment.
19 They went out from us, but they were not part of us; for if they had been part of us, they would have remained with us, but it was in order that it might be made apparent that they are not any of them part of us.
20 And you have an anointment from the Holy One, and you all know; 21 I have not been writing to you because you do not know the truth, but because you know it and any lie does not belong to the truth.
22 Who is the liar but he who denies that Jesus is the Christ? this is the antichrist, he who denies the Father and the Son.
23 Anyone who denies the Son does not have the Father either; he who acknowledges the Son has the Father too.
24 For your part, let what you heard from the first dwell in you; if what you heard from the first dwells in you, so will you dwell in the Son and in the Father.
25 And the promise he made to us is this: eternal life.
26 These things I have written to you about those who are misleading you.
27 And for your part, the anointment you received from him dwells in you, and you have no need that one should teach you; but as his anointment teaches you about everything, and is true and is not a lie, and as he did teach you, dwell in him.
28 And now, children, dwell in him, in order that if he makes his appearance we may have confidence and not be shamed away from him at his coming.
29 If you know that he is righteous, you take knowledge that everyone who does right is born out of him.
3:1-24
3 See what love the Father has given us, that we should be called children of God’s, and are such!
This is why the world does not know us because it did not know him.
2 Dear friends, we are children of God’s now, and it is not yet made apparent what we shall be.
We know that if he makes his appearance we shall be like him, because we shall see him as he is; 3 and everyone who has this hope rested on him purifies himself as he is pure.
4 Everyone who commits sin is committing immorality too; and sin is immorality.
5 And you know that he made his appearance to take sins away, and there is no sin in him.
6 Anyone who dwells in him does not sin; anyone who sins has not seen him nor known him.
7 Children, let nobody delude you.
He who does right is righteous as He is righteous; 8 he who commits sin comes of the Devil, because the Devil has been sinning from the first.
It was for this the Son of God made his appearance, that he might break up the Devil’s work.
9 Anyone who is born out of God does not commit sin, because seed of his dwells in him and he cannot sin because he is born out of God.
10 It is by this that God’s children and the Devil’s children are evident: anyone who does not do right does not come of God, nor the one who does not love his brother, 11 because this is the message you heard from the first, that we are to love each other 12 not as Cain came of the Evil One and cut his brother’s throat; and cut his brother’s throat on what account? because his doings were wicked, but his brother’s right.
13 Do not wonder, brothers, that the world should hate you; 14 we know that we have passed from death to life because we love the brothers.
He who does not love dwells in death.
15 Anyone who hates his brother is a killer, and you know that any man-killer does not have eternal life dwelling in him.
16 We know love by this, that he laid down his life for us; and we are in duty bound to lay down our lives for the brothers.
17 But one who has earthly resources and sees his brother to be in need and shuts his sympathies against him how is the love of God dwelling in him? 18 Children, let us not love with words nor with the tongue, but in action and in truth.
19 By this we shall know that we belong to the truth; and we shall persuade our heart before him 20 that if our heart finds against us, God is greater than our heart and knows everything.
21 Dear friends, if our heart does not find against us we have confidence to come to God, 22 and we receive from him whatever we ask, because we are keeping his commandments and doing what is pleasing before him.
23 And this is his commandment, that we should believe the name of his Son Jesus Christ and love each other as he gave us a commandment.
24 And he who keeps his commandments dwells in him, and he in him; and by this we know that he is dwelling in us, from the Spirit that he gave us.
4 Dear friends, do not believe every spirit, but put the spirits to the test, whether they come from God, because there have many pretended prophets gone out into the world.
2 You know God’s Spirit by this: any spirit that acknowledges Jesus Christ to have come in flesh comes from God, 3 and any spirit that does not acknowledge Jesus does not come from God; and this is that of the antichrist, which you have heard is coming, and it is already in the world now.
4 You come of God, children, and have won the victory over them because he who is in you is greater than he who is in the world.
5 They come of the world; that is why they speak words of the world and the world hears them.
6 We come of God; he who knows God hears us, he who does not come of God does not hear us.
It is from this that we know the spirit of truth and the spirit of delusion.
7 Dear friends, let us love each other, because love is from God and everyone who loves is born out of God and knows God.
8 He who does not love never got to know God, because God is love.
9 God’s love was displayed in our case by this, that God has sent his only Son into the world in order that we may live through him.
10 This is where love comes in, not that we have loved God but that he loved us and sent his Son to be a propitiation for our sins.
11 Dear friends, if God loved us like that, we are in duty bound to love each other too.
12 Nobody has ever looked upon God; if we love each other God is dwelling in us, and his love has been carried to perfection in us.
13 That we are dwelling in him and he in us we know by this, that he has given us some of his Spirit.
14 And we have seen the sight and testify to it that the Father has sent the Son to be savior of the world.
15 Whoever acknowledges that Jesus is the Son of God, God is dwelling in him and he in God.
16 And we know, and have believed, the love that God has in our case.
God is love, and he who dwells in love is dwelling in God and God in him.
17 It is in this that love has been brought to perfection with us, that we should have confidence on the day of judgment because what he is we too, in this world, are.
18 There is no fear in love, but perfect love throws fear out, because fear involves the idea of punishment and he who fears has not come to perfection in love.
19 We love because he loved us first.
20 If one says "I love God " and hates his brother he is a liar; for he who does not love his brother whom he has seen cannot love God whom he has not seen, 21 and we have from him this commandment, that he who loves God should love his brother too.
5 Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ is born out of God, and everyone who loves the sire loves him who is born from him.
2 It is by this we know that we love God’s children, when we love God and live up to his commandments.
3 For this is the love of God, that we should keep his commandments; and his commandments are not burdensome, 4 because everything that is born out of God comes off victorious over the world; and this is the victory that has come off victorious over the world, our faith.
5 And who is it that is victorious over the world but he who believes that Jesus is the Son of God? 6 This is the one that came by water and blood, Jesus Christ; not in the water only but in the water and in the blood; and the Spirit is what testifies, because the Spirit is the truth 7 because it is three who testify, 8 the Spirit and the water and the blood, and the three concur.
9 If we receive men’s testimony, God’s testimony is superior; because this is God’s testimony, that he has testified about his Son.
10 He who believes in the Son of God has the testimony in him.
He who does not believe God has made a liar of him because he has not believed in the testimony God has borne about his Son.
11 And this is the testimony, that God has given us eternal life and this life is in his Son.
12 He who has the Son has the life; he who does not have the Son of God does not have the life.
13 I have written these things to you in order that you may know that you have eternal life, to you who believe in the name of the Son of God.
14 And this is the confidence we have for coming to him, that if we ask anything in accordance with his will he hears us; 15 and if we know that he hears us in whatever we ask, we know that we have the things we have asked him for.
16 If one sees his brother sinning, a sin not for death, he shall ask and give life to him, to those who are sinning not for death.
There is such a thing as a sin for death; it is not as to that that I say he is to solicit.
17 Every wrong act is a sin, and there is such a thing as a sin not for death.
18 We know that anyone who has been born out of God does not sin, but he who was born out of God keeps him and the Evil One does not touch him.
19 We know that we belong with God; and the world is all lying in the Evil One; 20 but we know that the Son of God has come and has given us a mind to know the True One; and we are in the True One, in his Son Jesus Christ.
This is the true God, and eternal life.
21 Children, guard yourselves against the idols.
2 John
1:1-13
1 The Elder to the chosen lady and her children, whom I love in truth, and not I alone but also all who know the truth, 2 because of the truth that abides in us and shall be with us forever: 3 grace, mercy, peace, shall be with us from God the Father and from Jesus Christ the Father’s Son, in truth and love.
4 I have been exceedingly glad to find some children of yours walking in truth as we received a commandment from the Father.
5 And now, lady, not as writing you a new commandment but the one we had from the first, I pray you that we love each other.
6 And this is love, that we should walk in accordance with his commandments.
This is the commandment, as you heard from the first, that you should walk in it.
7 Because there have come out into the world many deluders who do not acknowledge that Jesus Christ is coming in flesh: that man is the deluder and the antichrist.
8 Look out for yourselves that you do not lose what we worked for, but get paid in full.
9 Anyone who moves on and does not remain in the Christ’s teaching does not have God; it is he who remains in the teaching that has both the Father and the Son.
10 If anyone comes to you and does not bring this teaching, do not receive him in a house and do not say good morning to him, 11 for he who says good morning to him is in fellowship with his evil deeds.
12 While I have much to write to you, I do not wish to with paper and ink, but hope to be with you and speak face to face, that your joy may be complete.
13 Your chosen sister’s children send greetings.
3 John
1 The Elder to dear Gaius, whom I love in truth:
2 Dear friend, I pray that you may prosper about everything, and have sound health, as your soul is prospering.
3 For I was exceedingly glad when brothers came and testified to your truth, as you are walking in the truth.
4 I have no greater gladness than this, to hear that my children are walking in the truth.
5 Dear friend, you are doing a Christian thing in anything you are doing for the brothers who are at the same time strangers in your locality, 6 who have testified to your love before the church; to whom you will do well to give a send-off worthy of God, 7 for they went out for the Name, not taking anything from the heathen 8 so we ought to contribute to the support of such, that we may become cooperators with the truth.
9 I wrote something to the church; but Diotrephes, who is so fond of being first among them, will not give us a hearing.
10 For this reason, if I come, I will bring up the matter of his actions in gabbling wicked words against us, and, not content with that, not giving the brothers a hearing himself, and also forbidding and expelling from the church those who would be willing to.
11 Dear friend, do not imitate what is wrong but what is right.
He who does right comes of God; he who does wrong has not seen God.
12 Demetrius is vouched for by everybody and by the truth itself; and we too vouch, and you know our testimony is true.
13 I had much to write to you, but do not wish to write you by pen and ink; 14 but I hope to see you at once, and we shall speak face to face.
Peace be upon you.
Our friends send greetings.
Give personal greetings to our friends.
Jude
1 Judah, servant of Jesus Christ and brother of James, to the called who are loved in God the Father and kept for Jesus Christ: 2 mercy and peace and love be yours in abundance.
3 Dear friends, while I was doing my utmost to write to you about our common salvation, I have found it necessary to write you an exhortation to do battle for the faith once delivered to God’s people.
4 For there have slipped in some men forewritten of old for this doom, impious men who shift the grace of our God into immorality and repudiate our only Master and Lord, Jesus Christ.
5 But I would remind you, though you know the whole once for all, that after the Lord had saved a people out of the land of Egypt he in the second instance destroyed those who did not believe, 6 and angels who did not keep their prerogative but left their domicile he has kept under darkness by everlasting fetters for the judgment of the Great Day, 7 as Sodom and Gomorrah and the cities around them, having run into debauchery and gone after another flesh in like manner with these, are on exhibition as an example, undergoing the penalty of eternal fire.
8 However, in the same fashion these too, obsessed by dreams, pollute flesh, and set lordship aside, and vilify glories.
9 But the archangel Michael, when he was arguing with the Devil over the body of Moses, did not dare to prefer a defamation-charge, but said "The Lord rebuke you! " 10 But these vilify whatever they do not know; and what they do by nature make out like the brutes, in this they find their undoing.
11 Woe to them, because they have traveled Cain’s road, and streamed over Balaam’s devious course for pay, and perished in Korah’s sedition.
12 These are those "who in your love-feasts fearlessly feast with you, and are your sunken rocks, " shepherds that feed themselves, waterless clouds carried along by winds, twice-dead fruitless autumn trees uprooted, 13 wild sea waves frothing up their own shames, wandering stars for which the blackness of darkness is forever kept.
14 And it was to these too that Enoch, seventh from Adam, prophesied "Here the Lord has come with his holy millions 15 to do justice upon all and to call all the impious to account regarding all their impieties that they have committed, and regarding all the hard words that impious sinners have spoken against him. " 16 These are faultfinding grumblers, going by their own desires, with mouths that pour out extravagant talk, deferring to persons for profit’s sake.
17 But as for you, dear friends, remember the words spoken beforehand by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, 18 how they told you "In the end of time there will be mockers going by their own desires for impieties. " 19 These are the discriminators, soul-men who have no spirit.
20 But do you, dear friends, building yourselves up upon your most holy faith, praying in Holy Spirit, 21 keep yourselves in the love of God, watching for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ which brings us to eternal life.
22 And convince some by proofs when they doubt, 23 and save some by snatching them out of fire, and pity some with fear, hating the very garment spotted by the flesh.
24 And to him who can guard you safe from stumbling and set you before his glory blameless and exultant, 25 the only God, our Savior, belong glory, majesty, might, and dominion, before all time and now and to all eternity; amen!
Revelation
1 Jesus Christ’s revelation which God gave him to show his servants what must soon take place, and which he sent by his angel and indicated to his servant John, 2 who testified to the word of God and to the testimony of Jesus Christ, all that he saw.
3 Happy are he who reads and those who hear the words of the prophecy and keep what is written in it; for the time is near.
4 John to the seven churches in Asia: Grace to you, and peace, from him who Is and Was and Is Coming, and from the Seven Spirits that are before his throne, 5 and from Jesus Christ the faithful witness, the firstborn of the dead and the ruler of the kings of the earth.
To him who loves us and liberated us from our sins with his blood, 6 and made us into a kingdom, priests to his God and Father, belong glory and might forever and ever; amen! 7 Lo, he is coming with the clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they who pierced him, and all the tribes of the earth shall wail over him.
Yes; amen
8 I am the A and the Z, says the Lord God; the one who Is and Was and Is Coming; the Almighty.
9 I, John, your brother and fellow-participator in distress and royalty and endurance in Jesus, was in the island called Patmos for the word of God and the testimony of Jesus.
10 I was in the spirit on the Lord’s day, and heard behind me a loud voice, as if it were the sound of a trumpet 11 saying "What you see, write in a book and send to the seven churches, to Ephesus and to Smyrna and to Pergamum and to Thyatira and to Sardis and to Philadelphia and to Laodicea. " 12 And I turned around to see the voice that was speaking with me; and when I turned around I saw seven golden lampstands, 13 and in the midst of the lampstands the like of a son of man dressed in a long robe and belted at the breast with a golden belt, 14 his head and hair white like white wool, like snow, and his eyes like flame, 15 and his feet like green gold as if it had been refined in a furnace, and his voice like the sound of much water; 16 with seven stars in his right hand and a sharp two-edged sword coming out of his mouth; and his appearance like the sun when it shines its strongest.
17 And when I saw him I fell at his feet like a dead man; and he put his right hand on me, saying
"Do not be afraid; I am the first and the last, 18 he who is alive and was dead and is alive, lo, forever and ever, and has the keys of death and the grave.
19 So write what you saw, and what is, and what is to be after this.
20 The secret meaning of the seven stars that you saw lying in my right hand, and the seven golden lampstands: the seven stars are the angels of the seven churches; and the lampstands seven, seven churches.
2 "To the angel of the church in Ephesus write, ‘Says he who holds the seven stars in his right hand, he who walks in the midst of the seven golden lampstands: 2 I know your deeds and your labor and endurance; and that you cannot bear bad men, and you tested those who call themselves apostles and are not, and found them liars; 3 and you have endurance, and have borne things on account of my name and are not tired.
4 But I have against you your having left off your first love; 5 so remember what you have fallen from, and repent and do the deeds that you did at first; else you shall find me coming, and I will move your lampstand out of its place if you do not repent.
6 But this you have, that you hate the deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I too hate.
7 Let him who has an ear hear what it is that the Spirit is saying to the churches. To the victor I will give the privilege of eating from the tree of life that is in God’s paradise.’
8 "And to the angel of the church in Smyrna write, ‘Says the First and the Last, he who was dead and came to life: 9 I know your distress and your poverty (but you are rich) and your vilification on the part of those who profess to be Jews and are not but are a congregation of Satan.
10 Do not be afraid of what you are to suffer: lo, the devil is to throw some of you into prison that you may be tested, and you shall have ten days’ distress.
Be faithful even to death, and I will give you the wreath of life.
11 Let him who has an ear hear what it is that the Spirit is saying to the churches. The victor shall not be hurt by the second death.’
12 "And to the angel of the church in Pergamum write, ‘Says he who has the sharp two-edged sword: 13 I know where you live where Satan’s throne is; and you hold on to my name, and did not deny my faith even in the days of my witness Antipas, my faithful one, who was killed in your town, where Satan lives.
14 But I have a few things against you, because you have there people who hold the teaching of Balaam, who taught Balak to lay a snare to trip up the sons of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to idols and to have immoral relations between the sexes.
15 Just so you too have men who similarly hold the teaching of the Nicolaitans.
16 So repent; else you shall quickly find me coming, and I will make war on them with my mouth-sword.
17 Let him who has an ear hear what it is that the Spirit is saying to the churches. To the victor I will give a portion of the hidden manna; and I will give him a white stone, and inscribed on the stone a new name which no one but the receiver knows.’
18 "And to the angel of the church in Thyatira write, ‘Says the Son of God, he who has eyes like flame and feet like green gold: 19 I know your deeds, and your love and faith and service and endurance, and that your last deeds are more than your first.
20 But I have against you your permitting the woman Jezebel, her who calls herself a prophetess and teaches and misleads my servants to have immoral relations between the sexes and to eat things sacrificed to idols, 21 and I gave her time to repent and she is not willing to repent of her immorality.
22 Lo, I will stretch her on a couch, and throw those who commit adultery with her into great distress if they do not repent of her dealings, 23 and will kill her children with an epidemic, and all the churches shall know that I am he who searches hearts and bosoms; and I will give to each of you according to his deeds.
24 But you others in Thyatira, as many as do not have this teaching, those who do not, as they say, know the deep things of Satan, to you I say, I put on you no other burden; 25 what you have, though, hold till I come.
And to the victor, 26 the man who keeps my dealings till the end, I will give dominion over the nations, 27 that he should drive them with an iron rod as earthen dishes are shattered, as I too received from my Father; 28 and I will give him the morning star.
29 Let him who has an ear hear what it is that the Spirit is saying to the churches.’
3 "And to the angel of the church in Sardis write, ‘Says he who has the Seven Spirits of God and the seven stars: I know your deeds, that you have the name of being alive and are dead.
2 Get awake, and strengthen what is left, that was about to die; for I have not found work of yours accomplished before my God; 3 so remember how it was that you received and heard, and keep it and repent.
So if you do not keep awake I will come like a thief, and you shall not know at what hour I will come upon you.
4 But you have a few names in Sardis that did not soil their clothing, and they shall walk with me in white, because they are worthy to.
5 The victor shall be thus clad in white clothing; and I will not blot out his name from the book of life, and I will acknowledge his name before my Father and before his angels.
6 Let him who has an ear hear what it is that the Spirit is saying to the churches.’
7 "And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia write, ‘Says the Holy, the True, he who has David’s key, who opens and nobody shall shut, and shuts and nobody shall open: 8 I know your deeds; lo, I have set before you an open door which nobody can shut, because you have a little power and have kept my word and not disowned my name.
9 Lo, I grant men out of Satan’s congregation, of those who profess to be Jews and are not but are lying, lo, I will make them come and do reverence before your face and know that I have loved you.
10 Because you kept my word of endurance, so will I keep you from the hour of testing that is to come all over the world of men, to test those who live on the earth.
11 I am coming quickly; hold what you have, that no one may get your wreath.
12 The victor I will make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall never again go outside; and I will inscribe on him the name of my God and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem that is coming down out of heaven from my God, and my new name.
13 Let him who has an ear hear what it is that the Spirit is saying to the churches.’
14 "And to the angel of the church in Laodicea write, ‘Says the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of God’s creation: 15 I know your deeds, that you are neither cold nor hot.
I wish you were cold or hot! 16 Thus, because you are lukewarm and neither hot nor cold, I am going to vomit you out of my mouth.
17 Because you say "I am rich, my fortune is made, I am in no want of anything, " and do not know that you are the very one who is wretched and pitiable and poor and blind and naked, 18 I advise you to buy of me fire-refined gold so that you may be rich, and white clothes so that you may be clad and the shame of your nakedness not be exposed, and eye-salve to put on your eyes so that you may see.
19 As many as I love I reprove and discipline; so be jealous and repent.
20 Here I am standing at the door and knocking: if one hears my voice and opens the door I will come in to him and have supper with him, and he with me.
21 To the victor I will give a seat with me on my throne, as I too won the victory and took the seat with my Father on his throne.
22 Let him who has an ear hear what it is that the Spirit is saying to the churches.’ "
4:1-11
4 After this I saw, and there in the sky was an opened door; and the first voice that I had heard, as if of a trumpet talking with me, saying "Come up here and I will show you what must take place after this. " 2 At once I was in the spirit, and there a throne stood in heaven, and on the throne one was sitting; 3 and he who was sitting there was in aspect like a jaspid stone and a sard; and a rainbow around the throne, in aspect like an emerald.
4 And around the throne twenty-four thrones, and sitting on the thrones twenty-four aged men clad in white clothes, and on their heads golden wreaths.
5 And out of the throne go lightnings and noises and thunderclaps; and there are seven torches of fire burning before the throne, which are the Seven Spirits of God; 6 and before the throne is what seems as if it were a sea of glass, like crystal; and in the middle of the throne and round about the throne four creatures full of eyes before and behind, 7 the first creature being like a lion and the second creature like a steer, and the third creature with a face like a man’s, and the fourth creature like a flying eagle, 8 and all four creatures with six wings apiece; they are full of eyes all around and inward, and they have no rest day and night saying "Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God, the Almighty, the one who Is and Was and Is Coming. " 9 And when the creatures give glory and honor and thanks to him who sits on the throne, him who lives forever and ever, 10 the twenty-four aged men will throw themselves down before him who sits on the throne and do reverence to him who lives forever and ever, and drop their wreaths before the throne saying 11 "Worthy art thou, our Lord and God, to receive glory and honor and power, because thou didst create all things, and at thy will they were and were created. "
5 And I saw lying in the right hand of him who sat on the throne a book written on the inside and on the back, sealed up with seven seals; 2 and I saw a strong angel making proclamation in a loud voice "Who is worthy to open the book and break its seals? " 3 and nobody in heaven nor on earth nor under the earth could open the book or look at it.
4 And I wept much because nobody worthy to open the book or look at it was found.
5 And one of the aged men said to me "Do not weep; here, the Lion out of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, has won the day to open the book and its seven seals. " 6 And in the middle of the throne and the four creatures, and in the middle of the aged men, I saw standing a lamb looking as if it had been slaughtered, with seven heads and seven eyes, which are God’s Seven Spirits sent out into all the earth; 7 and it came, and it took it out of the right hand of him who sat on the throne.
8 And when it took the book the four creatures and the twenty-four aged men threw themselves down before the lamb, having each one a harp, and golden saucers full of incense which are the prayers of God’s people.
9 And they sing a new song, "Worthy you are to take the book and open its seals, because you were slaughtered and bought men for God with your blood out of every tribe and language and people and race, 10 and made them a kingdom and priests for our God, and they shall reign on the earth. " 11 And I saw and I heard the voice of many angels round about the throne and the creatures and the aged men; and their number was thousands of thousands and millions of millions, 12 saying in a loud voice "Worthy is the slaughtered lamb to receive power and wealth and wisdom and strength and honor and glory and blessing. " 13 And every created thing that there is in the heavens and on the earth and under the earth and over the sea, and everything in them, I heard saying "To him who sits on the throne, and to the lamb, belong blessing and honor and glory and might forever and ever. " 14 And the four creatures said "Amen "; and the aged men threw themselves down and did reverence.
6:1-17
6 And I saw when the lamb opened one of the seven seals, and I heard one of the four creatures say in a voice that sounded like a clap of thunder "Come! " 2 And I saw, and there was a white horse with a rider that had a bow and was given a wreath and went out victorious and to win victories.
3 And when he opened the second seal I heard the second creature say "Come! " 4 and another horse went out, a red one, with a rider to whom it was given to take peace from earth and that they should slaughter each other; and he was given a great sword.
5 And when he opened the third seal I heard the third creature say "Come! "
And I saw, and there was a black horse with a rider that had a balance in his hand; 6 and I heard what seemed to be a voice among the four creatures say "A quart of wheat for a shilling and three quarts of barley for a shilling; and do not injure the oil and the wine. "
7 And when he opened the fourth seal I heard the voice of the fourth creature saying "Come! " 8 And I saw, and there was an ashy horse with a rider whose name was Death, and the Grave followed with him, and they were given dominion over a fourth of the earth to kill by sword and by starvation and by epidemics and by the beasts of the earth.
9 And when he opened the fifth seal I saw underneath the altar the souls of those who had been slaughtered because of the word of God and of the testimony that they had.
10 And they cried out loudly "How long will it be, holy and true Master, before thou wilt do justice and avenge our blood upon those who live on earth? " 11 and they were each given a white robe, and were told to rest a little while longer till the number of their fellow-servants and their brothers, who were to be killed the same as they had been, should also be completed.
12 And I saw when he opened the sixth seal, and there was a great earthquake, and the sun became black like haircloth, and the whole moon became like blood, 13 and the stars of the sky fell to the earth as a fig-tree shaken by a great wind throws off its green fruit, 14 and the sky broke away like a sheet of paper rolling up, and every mountain and island were moved out of their places; 15 and the kings of the earth and the magnates and the generals and the rich and the strong and every slave and freeman hid themselves in the caves and among the rocks of the mountains, 16 and kept saying to the mountains and to the rocks "Fall on us and cover us away from him who sits on the throne and from the lamb’s anger, 17 because the great day of their anger has come, and who can stand? "
7:1-17
7 After this I saw four angels standing at the four corners of the earth holding the four winds of the earth, that no wind might blow over the land nor over the sea nor on any tree; 2 and I saw another angel coming up from the eastern horizon with the seal of the living God, and he cried out loudly to the four angels to whom it was given to injure the land and the sea 3 "Do not injure the land nor the sea nor the trees till we have sealed the servants of our God on their foreheads. " 4 And I heard the number of the sealed, a hundred and forty-four thousand sealed out of every tribe of the sons of Israel: 5 out of the tribe of Judah twelve thousand sealed, out of the tribe of Reuben twelve thousand, out of the tribe of Gad twelve thousand, 6 out of the tribe of Asher twelve thousand, out of the tribe of Naphtali twelve thousand, out of the tribe of Manasseh twelve thousand, 7 out of the tribe of Simeon twelve thousand, out of the tribe of Levi twelve thousand, out of the tribe of Issachar twelve thousand, 8 out of the tribe of Zebulun twelve thousand, out of the tribe of Joseph twelve thousand, out of the tribe of Benjamin twelve thousand sealed.
9 After this I saw, and there was a great crowd, that no one could count, out of every race and tribe and people and language, standing before the throne and before the lamb, clad in white robes and with palms in their hands, 10 and they cried loudly "Salvation belongs to our God who sits on the throne and to the lamb. " 11 And all the angels stood round about the throne and the aged men and the four creatures, and threw themselves down on their faces before the throne and did reverence to God, 12 saying "Amen, blessing and glory and wisdom and thanks and honor and power and strength belong to our God forever and ever; amen. " 13 And one of the aged men answered by saying to me "Who are these that are clad in the white robes, and where did they come from? " 14 Said I to him, "Sir, you know. "
And he said to me "These are the ones who come from the great distress, and who washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the lamb.
15 This is why they are before God’s throne and worship him day and night in his temple, and he who sits on the throne will spread his presence over them; 16 they will hunger no more and thirst no more, nor shall the sun strike upon them, nor any heat, 17 because the lamb in the center of the throne will take care of them and guide them to springs of waters of life; and God will wipe away every tear from their eyes. "
8 And when he opened the seventh seal there came a silence in heaven for a half-hour.
2 And I saw the seven angels who stand before God; and they were given seven trumpets.
3 And another angel came and took his stand on the altar with a golden censer, and was given much incense to use for the prayers of all God’s people on the golden altar before the throne; 4 and the smoke of the incense went up before God out of the angel’s hand for the prayers of God’s people.
5 And the angel took the censer, and he filled it with fire off the altar and threw it on the earth, and there came thunderclaps and noises and lightnings and an earthquake; 6 and the seven angels that had the seven trumpets prepared to blow.
7 And the first blew, and there was hail and fire mixed with blood, and it was thrown on the earth; and a third of the earth was burned up, and a third of the trees were burned up, and all green herbage was burned up.
8 And the second angel blew, and what seemed like a great mountain on fire was thrown into the sea; 9 and a third of the sea turned to blood, and a third of the live creatures in the sea died, and a third of the shipping was wrecked.
10 And the third angel blew, and there fell out of the sky a great star blazing like a torch; and it fell on a third of the rivers and on the springs of water; 11 and the star was named Wormwood.
And a third of the waters turned to wormwood, and many of the men died of the waters because they were turned bitter.
12 And the fourth angel blew, and a third of the sun was blasted and a third of the moon and a third of the stars, so that a third of them should be darkened and the day should not be light for a third of it, and likewise the night.
13 And I saw, and I heard an eagle flying in the zenith say loudly "Woe, woe, woe to those who live on the earth, from the remaining trumpet-notes of the three angels that are to blow. "
9:1-21
9 And the fifth angel blew, and I saw a star from the sky fallen to the earth, and it was given the key to the well of the abyss.
2 And it opened the well of the abyss, and smoke came up out of the well like the smoke of a great furnace, and the sun and the air were darkened from the smoke of the well.
3 And out of the smoke grasshoppers came out upon the ground, and they were given such powers as the scorpions on the ground have, 4 and were told not to injure the grass of the earth nor any green thing nor any tree, anything but the men who do not have God’s seal on their foreheads; 5 and it was given to them not to kill them, but that they should be tortured five months (and their torture was like the torture of a scorpion when it strikes a man), 6 and in those days men should look for death and not find it, and should desire to die and death should be fleeing away from them.
7 And the semblance of the grasshoppers was like horses prepared for war; and on their heads were what seemed to be wreaths like gold, and their faces were like faces of human beings, 8 and they had hair like women’s hair, and their teeth were like those of lions, 9 and they had coats of armor like iron armor, and the sound of their wings was like the sound of many-horsed chariots galloping to war.
10 And they have tails like scorpions, and stings; and in their tails is their power to injure men five months.
11 They have over them a king, the angel of the abyss; his name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in the Greek language he bears the name Apollyon.
12 The one Woe has gone; two more Woes are coming after.
13 And the sixth angel blew, and I heard one voice from the horns of the golden altar before God, 14 saying to the sixth angel, the one who had the trumpet, "Unchain the four angels that are chained at the great river Euphrates. " 15 And the four angels that were kept in readiness for the hour and day and month and year, to kill a third of mankind, were unchained.
16 And the number of the armies of cavalry was two hundred million; I heard their number.
17 And in my vision I saw the horses and their riders like this, with fire-colored and violet and sulfur-colored coats of armor; and the horses’ heads like lions’ heads, and out of their mouths went fire and smoke and sulfur-fumes.
18 By these three scourges a third of men were killed, by the fire and the smoke and the sulfur-fumes that went out of their mouths; 19 for the powers of the horses are in their mouths and in their tails; for their tails are like snakes, with heads, and with them they do injury.
20 And the rest of mankind, those who were not killed with these scourges, did not even repent of the deeds of their hands, not to do reverence to demons and to golden and silver and bronze and stone and wooden idols that can neither see nor hear nor walk, 21 and did not repent of their murders nor of their witchcraft nor of their unchastity nor of their thefts.
10:1-11
10 And I saw another angel, a strong one, come down out of the sky, wrapped in a cloud, the rainbow on his head and his face like the sun and his legs like pillars of fire, 2 and with a little open book in his hand; and he set his right foot on the sea and his left on the land, and cried out loudly, as a lion roars.
3 And when he cried out, the seven thunders spoke with their peals.
4 And when the seven thunders spoke, I was going to write, and I heard a voice out of the sky say "Seal up what the seven thunders spoke and do not write it. " 5 And the angel that I saw standing on the sea and the land lifted his right hand to the sky 6 and swore by him who lives forever and ever, who created the heavens and what is in them and the earth and what is in it and the sea and what is in it, that there should be no more delay, 7 but in the days of the blast of the seventh angel, when he was to sound, God’s secret plan as he had communicated it to his servants the prophets would be all done.
8 And the voice that I had heard out of the sky I heard speaking with me again and saying "Go take the open book in the hand of the angel who is standing on the sea and the land. " 9 And I went to the angel, telling him to give me the little book; and he said to me "Take it and eat it up, and it shall turn your stomach bitter; but in your mouth it shall be as sweet as honey. " 10 And I took the little book out of the angel’s hand and ate it up, and it was like sweet honey in my mouth; and when I had eaten it my stomach turned bitter.
11 And they said to me "You must prophesy again over many peoples and races and languages and kings. "
11:1-19
11 And I was given a reed like a staff, with the words "Rise and measure the temple of God, and the altar, and those who worship in it.
2 And exclude the court outside the temple, and do not measure it; because it is given to the nations, and they shall tread the sacred city underfoot forty-two months.
3 And I will give to my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy twelve hundred and sixty days, clad in sackcloth. 4 These are the two olive-trees, and the two lampstands, that stand before the Lord of the Earth.
And if one intends to injure them fire goes out of their mouths and consumes their enemies: 5 anyone who intends to injure them must be killed in this way.
6 These have authority to shut the sky, that rain may not fall during the days of their prophesying, and have authority over the waters to convert them into blood, and to smite the earth with every scourge as often as they wish.
7 And when they have finished their testimony the beast that comes up out of the abyss shall make war with them and defeat them and kill them; 8 and their corpses lie in the main street of the great city that is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, the same where their Lord was crucified; 9 and men of the peoples and tribes and languages and races look at their corpses three and a half days, and will not let their corpses be put in a tomb; 10 and those who live on the earth rejoice over them and jubilate, and shall send presents to each other, because these two prophets had tortured those who live on the earth. " 11 And after the three and a half days a spirit of life from God came into them, and they stood up on their feet, and great fear fell upon those who saw them.
12 And they heard a loud voice out of the sky say to them "Come up here "; and they went up into the sky in a cloud, and their enemies saw them; 13 and at that moment there came a great earthquake, and a tenth of the city fell, and there were killed in the earthquake seven thousand persons, and the rest were terror-struck and gave glory to the God of Heaven.
14 The second Woe has gone; the third Woe is coming quickly.
15 And the seventh angel blew, and there came loud voices in heaven saying "The empire of the world has come to be our Lord’s and his Christ’s, and he shall reign forever and ever. " 16 And the twenty-four aged men that were sitting on their thrones before God threw themselves down on their faces and did reverence to God, 17 saying "We thank thee, Lord God Almighty, who Is and Was, because thou hast taken thy great power and begun to reign, 18 and the nations have raged, and thy wrath has come and the time for the dead to be judged, and to give their reward to thy servants the prophets and the holy and to those who fear thy name, the small and the great, and to make havoc of the havoc-makers of the earth. " 19 And the temple of God in heaven was opened, and the ark of his covenant was visible in his temple; and there came lightnings and noises and thunderclaps and an earthquake and a great storm of hail.
12:1-17
12 And a great portent appeared in the sky, a woman clad in the sun, the moon under her feet and a wreath of twelve stars on her head, 2 about to have a child; and she was screaming in her labor-pains, in the torture of giving birth.
3 And another portent appeared in the sky: lo, a great fiery-red serpent with seven heads and ten horns and seven crowns on its heads, 4 its tail dragging a third of the stars in the sky and throwing them to earth.
And the serpent was standing before the woman who was to bear the child, in order to eat up her child when she did bear it.
5 And she bore a son, a male, who is to drive all nations with an iron rod; and her child was snatched away to God and his throne; 6 and the woman fled to the desert, where she has a place prepared by God where they are to feed her twelve hundred and sixty days.
7 And there came a war in the sky, Michael and his angels battling with the serpent; and the serpent and its angels battled, 8 and did not succeed, nor was there any longer to be found in the sky a place for them.
9 And the great serpent was thrown down, the primeval snake, he who is called the Devil and Satan, the misleader of the whole world of men thrown down to the earth, and its angels thrown down with it.
10 And I heard a loud voice in the sky say "Now is come our God’s salvation and power and empire, and his Christ’s dominion, because the accuser of our brothers is thrown down: he who accuses them before our God day and night, 11 and they won against him because of the Lamb’s blood and because of the word of their testimony, and did not love their lives even in the face of death.
12 Therefore jubilate, heavens and you that dwell in them! woe for the earth and the sea! because the Devil has gone down to you in a great rage, knowing that he has little time. "
13 And when the serpent saw that it was thrown down to the earth it chased the woman that had borne the male child.
14 And the woman was given the two wings of the great eagle that she might fly to her place in the desert, where she is fed for a time and times and half a time to keep her from the snake.
15 And the snake threw out of its mouth after the woman water like a river to sweep her off her feet; 16 and the earth took the woman’s part, and opened its mouth and drank up the river that the serpent threw out of its mouth.
17 And the serpent was angry with the woman, and went off to make war on the rest of her issue, that keep the commandments of God and have the testimony of Jesus; and it planted itself on the sand of the sea.
13:1-18
13 And I saw come up out of the sea a beast with ten horns and seven heads, ten crowns on its horns and names of blasphemy on its heads; 2 and the beast that I saw was like a leopard, and its feet like a bear’s, and its mouth like that of a lion, and the serpent gave it its own power and its throne and great dominion; 3 and one of its heads as if it had had its throat cut and was dying; and its death-wound was cured.
And the whole earth was fascinated over the beast; 4 and they did reverence to the serpent because it had given the beast the dominion, and did reverence to the beast saying "Who is like the beast? and who can war with it? " 5 And it was given a mouth uttering big speeches and blasphemies; and it was given dominion to act forty-two months; 6 and it opened its mouth for blasphemies against God, to blaspheme his name and his tabernacle, those who dwell in heaven.
7 And it was privileged to make war with God’s people and to defeat them; and it was given dominion over every tribe and people and language and race; 8 and all that live on the earth shall do it reverence, whoever has not had his name written in the Slaughtered Lamb’s book of life since the foundation of the world.
9 If anyone has an ear, let him listen: 10 whoever leads into captivity proceeds into captivity; whoever shall kill with the sword must be killed with the sword.
Here is the endurance and faith of God’s people.
11 And I saw another beast come up out of the earth; and it had two horns like a lamb, and it spoke like a serpent.
12 And it exercises all the first beast’s dominion in its presence; and it makes the earth and those who live in it do reverence to the first beast whose death-wound was cured.
13 And it exhibits great tokens, so as even to make fire come down out of the sky to the earth before men.
14 And it misleads those who live on the earth because of the tokens that it is privileged to exhibit before the beast, telling those who live on the earth to make an image of the beast that has the sword-cut and has come to life.
15 And it is privileged to give the beast’s image a spirit, so that the beast’s image shall even speak and cause as many as do not do reverence to the beast’s image to be killed.
16 And it causes everybody, small and great and rich and poor and free and slave, to have a stamp put on his right hand or on his forehead, 17 and that no one shall be able to buy or sell except one who has the stamp, the beast’s name or the number of its name.
18 Here is wisdom: let him who has intelligence calculate the beast’s number; for it is a man’s number. And its number is six hundred and sixty-six.
14:1-20
14 And I saw, and there was the lamb standing on Mount Sion, and with it a hundred and forty-four thousand who had its name and its Father’s name written on their foreheads.
2 And I heard a sound out of heaven like the sound of much water and like the sound of loud thunder; and the sound that I heard was like that of harpers playing on their harps.
3 And they were singing what seemed to be a new song before the throne and before the four creatures and the aged men; and nobody could learn the song except the hundred and forty-four thousand who had been bought from the earth.
4 These are they who were not defiled with women: for they are virgins.
These are they who follow the lamb wherever it goes.
These were bought from mankind as firstfruits for God and the lamb, 5 and in their mouths was found no falsehood: they are without a flaw.
6 And I saw another angel flying in the zenith with an eternal gospel to preach to those who dwell on the earth and to every race and tribe and language and people, 7 saying in a loud voice "Fear God and give him glory, because the hour for his judgment has come; and do reverence to him who made the heavens and the earth and sea and springs of water. "
8 And a second angel followed, saying "She has fallen, she has fallen, great Babylon who gave all nations the wine of her rage of unchastity to drink. "
9 And a third angel followed them, saying in a loud voice "Whoever is doing reverence to the beast and its image, and taking a stamp on his forehead or on his hand, 10 he too shall drink the wine of God’s wrath that is mixed undiluted in the cup of his anger, and shall be tortured with fire and sulfur before holy angels and before the lamb; 11 and the smoke of their torture goes up forever and ever, and they have no rest day nor night, those who do reverence to the beast and its image and whoever takes the stamp of its name.
12 Here is the endurance of God’s people, those who keep the commandments of God and the faith of Jesus. "
13 And I heard a voice out of the sky say "Write ‘Happy are the dead who die in the Lord henceforth yes, says the Spirit, to rest from their labors; for their deeds follow with them.’ "
14 And I saw, and there was a white cloud; and sitting on the cloud the like of a son of man, with a golden wreath on his head and a sharp sickle in his hand.
15 And another angel came out of the temple, calling in a loud voice to the one who was sitting on the cloud "Out with your sickle and reap, because reaping-time has come, because the harvest of the earth is dry "; 16 and the one who was sitting on the cloud threw his sickle on the earth, and the earth was reaped.
17 And another angel came out of the temple in heaven, also with a sharp sickle.
18 And another angel came out of the altar, he who has dominion over fire, and called loudly to the one who had the sharp sickle "Out with your sharp sickle and harvest the clusters of the vine of the earth, because its grapes are ripe "; 19 and the angel threw his sickle to the earth, and harvested the vintage of the vine of the earth and threw it into the great winepress of God’s wrath.
20 And the winepress was trodden outside the city, and blood came out of the winepress up to horses’ bridles two hundred miles off.
15:1-8
15 And I saw another portent in the sky, a great and wonderful: seven angels with the seven last plagues the last, because in them the wrath of God is finished.
2 And I saw what seemed as if it were a sea of glass mixed with fire; and standing on the sea of glass, with harps divine, those who have come off victorious from the beast and from its image and from its name-number.
3 And they sing the song of Moses the servant of God and the song of the lamb: "Great and wonderful are thy deeds, Lord God Almighty; right and true are thy courses, King of the nations.
4 Who shall not be afraid, Lord, and glorify thy name because thou alone art holy? because all nations shall come and do reverence before thee, because thy right-doing is made manifest. "
5 And after this I saw, and the temple of the tent of attestation in heaven was opened, 6 and out of the temple came the seven angels that had the seven plagues, dressed in bright clean flax and belted round the chest with golden belts.
7 And one of the four creatures gave the seven angels seven golden saucers full of the wrath of God, who lives forever and ever.
8 And the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God and from his power, and nobody could enter the temple until the seven plagues of the seven angels should be finished.
16:1-21
16 And I heard a loud voice out of the temple say to the seven angels "Go and pour out the seven saucers full of the wrath of God on the earth. "
2 And the first went and poured out his saucer on the earth, and it became a rank malignant sore on the men who had the beast’s stamp and who did reverence to its image.
3 And the second poured out his saucer on the sea, and it became blood like that of a dead man, and all animate life died, what was in the sea.
4 And the third poured out his saucer on the rivers and the springs of water, and they became blood; 5 and I heard the angel of the water say "Thou art just, O holy Who Is and Was, in that thou didst pronounce these sentences, 6 because they shed the blood of holy men and of prophets and thou hast given them blood to drink: they deserve it "; 7 and I heard the altar say "Yes, Lord God Almighty, true and just are thy judgments. "
8 And the fourth poured out his saucer on the sun, and it was given to the sun to scorch men with fire, 9 and men suffered a great scorching and blasphemed the name of the God who has dominion over these plagues, and did not repent to give him glory.
10 And the fifth poured out his saucer on the beast’s throne, and its empire was thrown into darkness, and they chewed their tongues for pain 11 and blasphemed the God of heaven for their pains and their sores, and did not repent of their deeds.
12 And the sixth poured out his saucer on the great river Euphrates, and its water was dried up that the road for the kings from the sunrise might be prepared.
13 And I saw three unclean spirits, like frogs, out of the serpent’s mouth and out of the beast’s mouth and out of the pretended prophet’s mouth; 14 for there are spirits of demons, doing tokens, that go out after the kings of the whole world of men to bring them together for the war of the great day of God Almighty.
15 I am coming like a thief: happy is he who keeps awake and guards his clothes, that he may not go naked and have people see his indecent condition.
16 And he brought them together to the place called in Hebrew Har Magedon.
17 And the seventh poured out his saucer on the air, and there came out of the temple from the throne a loud voice saying "It is done "; 18 and there were lightnings and noises and thunderclaps, and there was a great earthquake, such an earthquake as there has not been since there was a man on earth, 19 and the great city went into three parts and the cities of the nations fell.
And great Babylon was remembered before God, to give her the wine-cup of his fierce anger.
20 And every island took flight, and mountains left no trace.
21 And great hailstones, about a hundredweight each, came down upon men out of the sky; and men blasphemed God at the plague of the hail, because it was a very great plague.
17:1-18
17 And one of the seven angels that had the seven saucers came and talked with me, saying "Come here, I will show you the sentence of the great prostitute seated on a great water, 2 with whom the kings of the earth debauched themselves and the inhabitants of the earth were intoxicated with the wine of her unchaste embraces "; 3 and he carried me away to a desert in the spirit.
And I saw a woman sitting on a scarlet beast full of names of blasphemy, with seven heads and ten horns; 4 and the woman was clad in purple and scarlet and jeweled with gold and precious stones and pearls, with a golden cup in her hand full of abominations and the filth of her prostitution, 5 and written on her forehead a name with a secret meaning, "Great Babylon, mother of the prostitutes and abominations of the earth. " 6 And I saw the woman drunk with the blood of God’s people and with the blood of Jesus’s witnesses.
And great was my wonder at seeing her.
7 And the angel said to me "Why did you wonder?
8 The beast that you saw was and is not, and is to come up out of the abyss, and goes to destruction; and those who live on the earth shall wonder, those whose names were not written in the book of life from the foundation of the world, as they see how the beast was and is not and shall make its appearance.
9 Here is the mind that has wisdom.
The seven heads are seven hills that the woman is seated on; 10 and they are seven kings five have fallen, one is, the other has not yet come, and must remain a little while when he does come.
11 And the beast that was and is not is himself an eighth and one of the seven, and goes to destruction.
12 And the ten horns that you saw are ten kings who had not yet received empire, but they do receive dominion as kings for one hour with the beast.
13 These are of one mind, and give their power and dominion to the beast.
14 These shall make war with the lamb, and the lamb shall defeat them, because he is Lord of Lords and King of Kings and those who are with him are called and chosen and faithful. "
15 And he said to me "The waters that you saw, where the prostitute is seated, are peoples and masses and races and languages.
16 And the ten horns that you saw, and the beast, these shall hate the prostitute and make her destitute and naked, and eat her flesh, and burn her in a fire; 17 for God has put it into their hearts to do what is in his mind, and to concur unanimously in giving their empire to the beast till God’s words are all done.
18 And the woman that you saw is the great city that has empire over the kings of the earth. "
18:1-24
18 After this I saw coming down out of the sky another angel, one that had great dominion, and the earth was lighted up with his glory.
2 And he cried with a strong voice "She has fallen, she has fallen, great Babylon has fallen and become a home of demons and a haunt of every unclean spirit and a haunt of every unclean and odious bird, 3 because all the nations have drunk the wine of her rage of unchastity and the kings of the earth have debauched themselves with her and the merchants of the earth have grown rich out of the rush of her luxurious life. " 4 And I heard another voice out of the sky say "Come out of her, my people, that you may not be a party to her sins and may not share in her scourges, 5 because her sins have been crowded up to the sky and God has remembered her iniquities.
6 Pay her in the same coin that she paid in, and redouble to her the double of her own deeds; in the cup that she mixed in mix a double draft for her; 7 for every bit of her self-glorification and luxury give her as much of torment and mourning.
Because she says in her heart ‘I am enthroned queen, I am not a widow, I shall not see mourning,’ 8 for this reason her scourges shall come in one day, pestilence and mourning and starvation, and she shall be burned in a fire, because strong is the Lord God who has judged her.
9 And the kings of the earth, who have debauched themselves with her and lived luxuriously in her company, shall weep and wail over her when they see the smoke of the burning of her, 10 standing far away for the fear of her torture, saying ‘Alas, alas, great city, Babylon, powerful city! because in one moment your judgment has come.’ 11 And the merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn over her because nobody buys their cargoes any longer, 12 cargoes of gold and silver and precious stones and pearls and lawn and purple and silk and crimson, and every variety of sandarac-wood and every article of ivory and every article made of costliest wood and of bronze and iron and marble, 13 and cinnamon and amomum and incense and perfume and frankincense and wine and oil and farina and wheat and cattle and sheep, and horses and carriages and slaves, and human lives.
14 And your summer dainties of heart’s desire are gone from you, and everything sumptuous and splendid of yours has perished, and nevermore shall anyone find them.
15 The merchants of these things, those who had grown rich from her, shall stand far away for the fear of her torture weeping and mourning, 16 saying ‘Alas, alas, great city clad in lawn and purple and crimson and jeweled with gold and precious stones and pearls! 17 because in one moment such wealth has been desolated.’
And every ship-captain and every voyager, and sailors and as many as get their living from the sea, stood far away 18 and cried, as they saw the smoke of the burning of her, ‘Who is like the great city?’ 19 and threw earth on their heads and cried, weeping and mourning, ‘Alas, alas, great city where all who had shipping at sea grew rich out of her costly fashions! because in one moment she has been desolated.’ 20 Jubilate over her, heaven! and God’s people and the apostles and the prophets! because God has passed judgment on her in your cause. "
21 And one strong angel took up a stone that seemed like a great millstone and hurled it into the sea, saying "Thus shall the great city Babylon be hurled down with a plunge and never be found again.
22 And there shall never be heard in you again the sound of harpers and minstrels and flute-players and trumpeters; and there shall never be found in you again any master of any art; and there shall never be heard in you again the sound of a mill; 23 and there shall never shine in you again the light of a lamp; and there shall never be heard in you again the voices of bridegroom and bride; because it was the magnates of the earth who were your merchants, because by your witchcraft all the nations were misguided.
24 And in her was found the blood of prophets and holy men and of all who have been slaughtered on earth. "
19:1-21
19 After this I heard what seemed like the loud voice of a great crowd in heaven saying "Hallelujah!
Salvation and glory and power belong to our God, 2 because his judgments are true and just; because he has done justice on the great prostitute who debauched the earth with her prostitution, and has avenged his servants’ blood at her hands "; 3 and for the second time they said "Hallelujah! "
And her smoke goes up forever and ever.
4 And the twenty-four aged men and the four creatures threw themselves down and did reverence to God who sits on the throne, saying "Amen; hallelujah! " 5 And from the throne came a voice saying "Praise our God, all his servants, you who fear him, small and great! " 6 And I heard what seemed as if it were the voices of a great crowd and the sound of much water and the pealing of strong thunders, all saying "Hallelujah, because the Lord our God Almighty has come into his reign! 7 Let us be glad and exult and give him glory, because the Lamb’s wedding has come and his wife has made her preparations 8 and has been given the privilege of dressing in bright clean lawn (because the lawn is the righteousnesses of God’s people). " 9 And he said to me "Write ‘Happy are those who are invited to the Lamb’s wedding dinner’ "; and he said to me "These words are true words of God’s. " 10 And I threw myself down before his feet to do him reverence; and he said to me "See that you do not!
I am a fellow-servant with you and your brothers that have the testimony of Jesus; do reverence to God.
For the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. "
11 And I saw heaven opened, and there was a white horse with a rider called Faithful and True, who judges and wars on the side of right: 12 his eyes are flame and there are many crowns on his head, and he has a written name which nobody knows but he, 13 and is clad in a mantle dyed in blood, and is named The Word of God.
14 And the armies in heaven followed him on white horses, dressed in clean white lawn.
15 And out of his mouth goes a sharp sword to smite the nations with, and he shall drive them with an iron rod; and he treads the press of God Almighty’s fierce anger-wine.
16 And he has on his mantle and on his thigh a written name, "King of Kings and Lord of Lords. "
17 And I saw one angel standing in the sun, and he cried with a loud voice to all the birds that fly in the zenith "Come, gather to God’s great banquet 18 to eat kings’ flesh and generals’ flesh and strong men’s flesh and flesh of horses and their riders and flesh of everybody, freemen and slaves and small and great. " 19 And I saw the beast and the kings of the earth and their armies gathered for the war with the rider on the horse and with his army.
20 And the beast was captured, and with it the pretended prophet who did before it the tokens by which he misled those that took the beast’s stamp and that did reverence to its image: the two were thrown alive into the lake of fire that burns with sulfur; 21 and the rest were killed by the rider’s sword that came out of his mouth, and all the birds gorged on their flesh.
20:1-15
20 And I saw an angel come down out of the sky with the key of the abyss, and a great chain over his arm; 2 and he seized the serpent, the primeval snake, who is the Devil and Satan, and chained him for a thousand years 3 and threw him into the abyss and locked and sealed it over him, that he might no longer mislead the nations until the thousand years are finished: after this he must be unchained a little while.
4 And I saw thrones, and they sat on them and were given a judgment to render; and the souls of those who had been beheaded for the testimony of Jesus and for the word of God, and such as had not done reverence to the beast nor to its image and had not taken the stamp on their foreheads and hands, and they came to life and reigned with the Christ for a thousand years.
5 The rest of the dead did not come to life until the thousand years are finished.
This is the first resurrection.
6 Happy and holy is he who has a part in the first resurrection: over these the second death does not have dominion, but they shall be priests of God and the Christ and shall reign with him for the thousand years.
7 And when the thousand years are finished Satan will be unchained from his prison 8 and will come out to mislead the nations in the four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them to the war; of whom the number is like the sand of the sea.
9 And they came up over the breadth of the land and surrounded the camp of God’s people and the beloved city; and fire came down out of the sky and devoured them, 10 and the Devil their misleader was thrown into the lake of fire and sulfur, the same where the beast and the pretended prophet are, and they shall be tortured day and night forever and ever.
11 And I saw a great white throne and the One who sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heavens fled and there was no place to be found for them.
12 And I saw the dead, the great and the small, standing before the throne, and books were opened; and another book was opened, which is that of life; and the dead were judged out of what was written in the books, in accordance with their deeds.
13 And the sea gave up the dead that were in it, and death and the world below gave up the dead that were in them, and they were judged each one in accordance with their deeds.
14 And death and the world below were thrown into the lake of fire: this is the second death, the lake of fire.
15 And whoever was not found written down in the book of life was thrown into the lake of fire.
21:1-27
21 And I saw new heavens and a new earth for the former heavens and the former earth are gone, and the sea no longer exists 2 and I saw the sacred city Jerusalem new, I saw it come down out of heaven from God, prepared like a bride adorned for her husband.
3 And I heard a loud voice out of the throne say "Lo, God’s abode is with men and he will abide with them, and they shall be his peoples and he will be God with them 4 and will wipe away every tear out of their eyes, and death will no longer exist, nor will mourning nor outcry nor pain any longer exist, because former things are gone "; 5 and he who sat on the throne said "Lo, I am making everything new "; and it said "Write, because these words are true and trustworthy. " 6 And he said to me "The work is done.
I am the A and the Z, the beginning and the end.
I will give him who is thirsty free water from the spring of the water of life.
7 The victor shall inherit these things, and I will be his God and he shall be my son.
8 But as for cowards and disbelievers and scoundrels and murderers and libertines and witchcraft-users and idolaters, and all liars, their portion shall be in the lake burning with fire and sulfur, which is the second death. "
9 And one of the seven angels that had the seven saucers full of the seven last plagues came and spoke with me, saying "Come, I will show you the bride, the Lamb’s wife. " 10 And he took me in the spirit to a great high mountain and showed me the sacred city Jerusalem coming down out of heaven from God, 11 having God’s glory: what it is lighted by is like a most precious stone, as if it were a crystalline jaspid stone; 12 it has a great high wall, and has twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and names written on the gates which are those of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel 13 on the east three gates and on the north three gates and on the south three gates and on the west three gates; 14 and the wall of the city has twelve foundations, and on them twelve names of the Lamb’s twelve apostles.
15 And the one who spoke with me had a measure, a golden reed, to measure the city and its gates and its wall.
16 And the city stands as a square, its length the same as its breadth.
And he measured the city with the reed for twelve thousand stadia: its length and its breadth and its height are equal.
17 And he measured its wall, a hundred and forty-four cubits, man’s measure, which is angel’s measure.
18 And the masonry of its wall was jaspid; and the city was pure gold like pure glass.
19 The foundations of the city’s wall were adorned with every precious stone: the first foundation jaspid, the second lapis lazuli, the third dioptase, the fourth emerald, 20 the fifth sardonyx, the sixth sard, the seventh topaz, the eighth beryl, the ninth peridot, the tenth chrysoprase, the eleventh sapphire, the twelfth amethyst.
21 And the twelve gates were twelve pearls: each one of the gates was made of one pearl.
And the avenues of the city were pure gold, that seemed as if it were transparent glass.
22 And I did not see any temple in it; for the Lord God Almighty is its temple, and the Lamb.
23 And the city does not need the sun or the moon to shine for it; for God’s glory lights it, and its lamp is the Lamb.
24 And the nations will walk through its light, and the kings of the earth bring their glory to it; 25 and its gates shall not be shut by day (for there will be no night there), 26 and they will bring the glory and honor of the nations to it; 27 and there shall not enter it any unholy thing and doer of abomination and falsehood, but those who are written down in the Lamb’s book of life.
22:1-21
22 And he showed me a river of water of life, bright as crystal, running out of the throne of God and the Lamb 2 through the middle of its main avenue; and on this side of the river and on that side were trees of life producing twelve crops of fruit, bringing in their fruit each month; and the leaves of the trees were for curing the diseases of the nations.
3 And there will no longer be any ban.
And the throne of God and the Lamb will be in it; and his servants, 4 his name on their foreheads, will worship him and see his face.
5 And there will no longer be night, and they do not need lamplight and sunlight, because the Lord God will light them; and they will reign forever and ever.
6 And he said to me "These words are true and trustworthy, and the Lord, the God of the prophets’ spirits, has sent his angel to show his servants what must soon take place.
7 And lo, I am coming quickly.
Happy is he who keeps the words of the prophecy of this book. " 8 And it was I, John, who heard and saw these things; and when I heard and saw, I threw myself down to do reverence before the feet of the angel who was showing me these things, 9 and he said to me "See that you do not!
I am a fellow-servant with you and your brothers the prophets and those who keep the words of this book; do reverence to God. "
10 And he said to me "Do not seal up the words of the prophecy of this book; for the time is near.
11 Let the wronger still wrong and the grimy still go grimy, and the righteous still do right, and the holy still act holily: 12 lo, I am coming quickly, with my pay with me to pay each as his work is.
13 I am the A and the Z, the first and the last, the beginning and the end.
14 Happy are those who wash their robes, that their rights may extend to the trees of life and they may enter the city by the gates; 15 outside are the dogs and the witchcraft-users and the libertines and the murderers and the idolaters and everybody who loves falsehood and does it.
16 I, Jesus, have sent my angel to give you this testimony over the churches.
I am the root and line of David, the bright morning star. "
17 And the Spirit and the Bride are saying "Come! " and let him who hears say "Come! " and whoever is thirsty, come! take water of life free, whoever will!
18 I testify to everyone who hears the words of the prophecy of this book that if one puts anything on to it God will put on him the scourges that are written in this book, 19 and if one takes anything away from the words of the book of this prophecy God will take his portion away from the trees of life, and from the sacred city, that are written in this book.
20 Says he who gives this testimony, "Yes, I am coming quickly. "
Amen: come, Lord Jesus.
21 The grace of the Lord Jesus be with God’s people.
Joshua
1 And after the death of Jehovah’s servant Moses, Jehovah said to Joshuaʽ the son of Nun, Moses’s attendant,
2 “My servant Moses is dead; now set out and cross this Jordan, you and all this people, to the country I am giving to them.
3 Every place that your foot shall tread on I have given to you, as I promised Moses.
4 From the wilderness and the Lebanon to the great river, the river Euphrates, and to the great sea where the sun sets, shall be your territory.
5 Not a man shall stand his ground before you as long as you live; as I was with Moses I will be with you; I will not neglect you nor abandon you.
6 Courage, and do your best, because you shall establish this people in the country I swore to their fathers to give them.
7 Only courage, and do your very best to take care to live up to all that my servant Moses enjoined upon you; do not turn from it to right or to left, in order that you may do well wherever you go.
8 This book of the code is never to pass out of your mouth: you are to study it day and night, in order that you may take care to live up to everything that is written in it, because then you will succeed in your efforts and will do well.
9 You have my orders: courage, and do your best; do not be overawed nor dismayed, because your God Jehovah is with you wherever you go.”
10 And Joshuaʽ gave orders to the marshals of the people,
11 “Pass through the interior of the camp and give the people the order ‘Get ready provisions for yourselves, because in three days more you are crossing this Jordan to go in to take possession of the country your God Jehovah is giving to you to possess.’”
12 And to the Reubenites and the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh Joshuaʽ said
13 “Remember the thing Jehovah’s servant Moses enjoined on you: your God Jehovah is bringing you to rest and giving you this country;
14 your women, your children, and your stock shall stay in the country Jehovah’s servant Moses gave you on the other side of the Jordan, but you shall go over under arms before your brothers, all the first-class men, and help them,
15 till Jehovah brings your brothers to rest like you and they too take possession of the country your God Jehovah is giving them, and you come back to the country that is your possession, which Jehovah’s servant Moses gave to you on the other side of the Jordan.”
16 And they answered Joshuaʽ “We will do just as you have ordered us and go wherever you send us;
17 we will obey you just the same as we obeyed Moses; only your God Jehovah be with you as he was with Moses.
18 Any man who disobeys you and does not listen to your words as to any order you give us shall be put to death; only courage, and do your best.”
2:1-24
2 And Joshuaʽ the son of Nun sent from the Acacias two men as scouts quietly, with the commission “Go see the country, and Jericho.”
And they went, and came into the house of a prostitute name Rahab, and went to bed.
2 And the king of Jericho was told “Men from the sons of Israel ha come here tonight to examine the country”;
3 and the king of Jericho sent word to Rahab “Hand out the men that went in to you, that have come to you, that have come to your house, because it was to examine all the country that they came.”
4 And the woman took the two men and secreted them, and said “The men did come in to me, but I did not know where they were from;
5 and when the gate was going to be shut at dark the men went out.
I do not know where the men went; follow them up quick, you will overtake them.”
6 But she had taken them up on the roof and buried them in the flax-stalks she had laid out on the roof;
7 and the men pursued them on the Jordan road to the fords, and they shut the gate when the men pursuing them had gone out.
8 And they had not yet gone to bed when she came up on the roof to them
9 and said to the men “I know that Jehovah has given the country to you, and that the terror of you has fallen on us
10 because we have heard how Jehovah dried up the water of the Red Sea before you when you came out of Egypt, and what you did to the two kings of the Amorites on the other side of the Jordan, Sihon and ʽOg, whom you cut down without quarter
11 and we heard of it and of hearts melted down, and no spirit stood up again in anybody because of you, because your god Jehovah is a god in the sky above and on the earth below.
12 Now swear to me by Jehovah, because I have befriended you, and befriend me and my family and give me a pledge of loyalty, 13 and keep my father and mother and brothers and sisters alive, and all that belongs to them, and rescue our persons from death.”
14 And the men said to her “Our persons instead of yours for death if you do not tell this affair of ours; and when Jehovah gives us the country we will befriend you loyally.”
15 And she let them down by a cord through the window, because her house was built into the wall and she lived against the wall,
16 and said to them “Go to the highland, for fear you should meet with the pursuers, and hide there three days till the pursuers get back, and afterward you may go your own way.”
17 And the men said to her “We are clear of this oath of ours that you had us swear.
18 Here, when we are coming into the country you shall tie this skein of scarlet thread in the window you let us down by, and get in your father and mother and brothers and all your family into the house with you;
19 and anyone who goes outside the doors of your house, his blood shall be on his own head and we shall be clear; but anyone who is with you in the house, his blood shall be on our heads if hands are laid on him.
20 But if you tell this affair of ours we are to be clear of your oath that you had us swear.”
21 And she said “That is right, as you say,” and sent them off, and they went; and she tied the skein of scarlet in the window.
22 And they went off into the highland and stayed there three days till the pursuers had got back; and the pursuers looked all along the road and did not find anybody.
23 And the two men came down again out of the highland and across to Joshuaʽ the son of Nun, and told him the story of everything that had happened to them;
24 and they said to Joshuaʽ “Jehovah has given all the country into our hands, all the inhabitants of the country are in collapse before us.”
3:1-17
3 And the first thing in the morning Joshuaʽ, he and all the sons of Israel, marched from the Acacias and came to the Jordan; and they bivouacked there, not crossing yet.
2 And at the end of three days the marshals passed through the camp
3 and gave the people orders, “When you see the ark of the covenant of our God Jehovah, and the Levite priests carrying it, take up the march yourselves from your places and follow it.
4 Only have a long distance between you and it, a full half-mile; do not come near it, in order that you may know the road you are to go by, because you have never gone over this road before.”
5 And Joshuaʽ said to the people “Hallow yourselves, because tomorrow Jehovah will do wonders among you.”
6 And Joshuaʽ said to the priests “Take up the ark of the covenant and pass before the people”; and they took up the ark of the covenant and went, before the people.
7 And Jehovah said to Joshuaʽ “This day I will begin to make you great before the eyes of all Israel, who shall know that as I was with Moses I will be with you.
8 And do you give the priests who carry the ark of the covenant the order ‘When you come to the edge of the water of the Jordan, stand still in the Jordan.’”
9 And Joshuaʽ said to the sons of Israel “Come here and listen to the words of your God Jehovah.”
10 And Joshuaʽ said “By this you are to know that you have a living Deity among you and he will dispossess before you the Canaanites and the Hittites and the Hivvites and the Perizzites and the Girgashites and the Amorites and the Jebusites.
11 Here is the ark of the covenant of the Lord of All the Earth going along before you into the Jordan.
12 Now take twelve men out of the tribes of Israel, one man to a tribe;
13 and when the feet of the priests who carry the ark of Jehovah the Lord of All the Earth rest in the water of the Jordan, the water of the Jordan will be cut off, the water that comes down from above, and stand up in one heap.”
14 And when the people took up the march from their tents to cross the Jordan, the priests that carried the ark of the covenant were ahead of the people;
15 and when the bearers of the ark came to the Jordan and the feet of the priests carrying the ark dipped into the edge of the water (and the Jordan was full all over its flood-plain throughout harvesttime)
16 the water that came down from above stood still, rose up in one heap at a great distance, at Adam, the city to one side of Sarethan, and what was running down to the Dead Sea, the Sea of Salt, exhausted itself and was gone, and the people crossed over opposite Jericho.
17 And the priests that carried the ark of Jehovah’s covenant stood firm on dry ground in the middle of the Jordan while all Israel were going across on dry ground, till all the nation were done crossing the Jordan.
4:1-24
4 And when all the nation were done crossing the Jordan, Jehovah spoke to Joshuaʽ, saying
2 “Take out of the people twelve men, on man out of a tribe,
3 and give them the order ‘Take up from here, from the middle of the Jordan, from the standing-place of the priests’ feet, twelve stones, and take them over with you and put them down at the halting-place where you halt for the night.’”
4 And Joshuaʽ called the twelve men he had made ready out of the sons of Israel, one man out of a tribe;
5 and Joshuaʽ said to them “Go over before the ark of your God Jehovah to the middle of the Jordan and lift to your shoulders one stone each, for the number of the tribes of the sons of Israel,
6 in order that this may be a token among you, because your sons shall ask you tomorrow ‘What do you mean by these stones?’
7 and you shall say ‘That the water of the Jordan was cut off before the ark of Jehovah’s covenant when it crossed the Jordan’; and these stones shall be a commemoration to the sons of Israel forever.”
8 An the sons of Israel did so, as Joshuaʽ had commanded, and took up twelve stones out of the middle of the Jordan, as Jehovah had told Joshuaʽ, for the number of the tribes of the sons of Israel, and took them over with them to the halting-place and put them down there.
9 And Joshuaʽ set up twelve stones in the middle of the Jordan on that standing-place of the feet of the priests who carried the ark of the covenant, and they are there to this day.
10 And the priests who carried the ark stood still in the middle of the Jordan till all the matter that Jehovah commanded Joshuaʽ to tell the people was done; and the people went across in haste;
11 and when all the people were done crossing, the ark of Jehovah and the priests went across before the people.
12 And the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh went across under arms before the sons of Israel as Moses had told them.
13 About forty thousand, armed for service, went across before Jehovah to the flats of Jericho to the war.
14 That day Jehovah made Joshuaʽ great before the eyes of all Israel; and they stood in fear of him as they had stood in fear of Moses as long as he lived.
15 And Jehovah spoke to Joshuaʽ, saying
16 “Give the priests who carry the ark of the Lessons the order to come up out of the Jordan.”
17 And Joshuaʽ gave the priests the order “Come up out of the Jordan”;
18 and when the priests who carried the ark of Jehovah’s covenant came up out of the middle of the Jordan, the priests’ feet were drawn out to the dry ground as the water of the Jordan came back to its place and ran as it had been doing, all over its flood-plain.
19 And the people came up from the Jordan on the tenth of the first month and camped at the Gilgal, on the east edge of Jericho’s territory.
20 And Joshuaʽ set up at the Gilgal these twelve stones which they had taken out of the Jordan;
21 and he said to the sons of Israel “When hereafter your children ask their fathers ‘What do these stones mean?’
22 you are to inform your children ‘On dry ground Israel came across this Jordan,’
23 because your God Jehovah dried up the water of the Jordan before you till you had come across, as your God Jehovah did to the Red Sea, which he dried up before you till you had come across,
24 in order that all the peoples of the earth might know Jehovah’s hand was strong, in order that you might fear your God Jehovah evermore.”
5:1-15
5 And when all the kings of the Amorites on the west side of the Jordan, and all the kings of the Canaanites by the seaside, heard that Jehovah had dried up the water of the Jordan before the sons of Israel till they had come across, their hearts melted down and they no longer had any spirit in them because of the sons of Israel.
2 At that time Jehovah said to Joshuaʽ “Make yourself flint blades and re-circumcise the sons of Israel”;
3 and Joshuaʽ made himself flint blades and circumcised the sons of Israel at Foreskin Hill.
4 And this was the occasion of Joshuaʽ’s circumcising: all the males of the people that had come out of Egypt, all the fighting men, had died in the wilderness on the way as they came out of Egypt
5 for all the people that came out had been circumcised, but all the people that were born in the wilderness on the way as they came out of Egypt had not,
6 because the sons of Israel had been going in the wilderness forty years till all the nation were gone, the fighting men that had come out of Egypt, who had not obeyed Jehovah, to whom Jehovah had sworn that he would not have them see the country Jehovah had sworn to their fathers to give us, a country that runs milk and honey;
7 and he had raised up their sons in their place.
Them Joshuaʽ circumcised, because they were uncircumcised; for they had not circumcised them on the way.
8 And when all the nation were done being circumcised, they stayed in camp where they were till they were well.
9 And Jehovah said to Joshuaʽ “Today I have galal, rolled off, the slur of the Egyptians from you,” and that place has been named Gilgal to this day.
10 And the sons of Israel camped at the Gilgal, and celebrated the passover on the fourteenth day of the month at evening, in the flats of Jericho.
11 And they ate corn of the country on the day after the passover, matzoth and roasted grain. That very day
12 the manna left off, on their eating corn of the country, and the sons of Israel no longer had manna but ate produce of Canaan that year.
13 And while Joshuaʽ was at Jericho he raised his eyes and found a man standing before him with his sword drawn in his hand; and Joshuaʽ went to him and said “Are you on our side or the enemy’s?”
14 And he said “No, I am Jehovah’s general, I have just come.”
And Joshuaʽ threw himself on his face on the ground and did reverence, and said to him “What has my lord to say to his servant?”
15 And Jehovah’s general said to Joshuaʽ “Slip your shoes off your feet, because the place you are standing on is sacred”; and Joshuaʽ did so.
6:1-27
6 And Jericho was locked and blocked for fear of the sons of Israel, nobody going out or coming in.
2 And Jehovah said to Joshuaʽ “See, I have given into your hands Jericho and its king, the stalwart men.
3 And you shall go round the city, all the fighting men, making the round of the city once; thus you shall do six days.
4 And seven priests shall carry the seven bugle-horns before the ark.
And on the seventh day you shall go round the city seven times, the priests blowing the horns;
5 and at the winding of the bugle-horn, when you hear the horn-blast, all the people shall give a loud cheer, and the wall of the city will fall flat and the people shall go up each man straight in.”
6 And Joshuaʽ the son of Nun summoned the priests and said to them “Take up the ark of the covenant, and let seven priests carry seven bugle-horns before Jehovah’s ark”;
7 and he said to the people “Pass on and go round the city, and let the armed contingent from the east pass ahead of Jehovah’s ark,
8 and let seven priests carrying the seven bugle-horns before Jehovah pass on and blow the horns, the ark of Jehovah’s covenant going behind them
9 and the armed contingent from the east going before the priests that blow the horns and the rearguard going behind the ark blowing horns as they go.”
10 And to the people Joshuaʽ gave the order “Do not cheer nor make your voices heard nor let a word come out of your mouths till the day that I say to you ‘Cheer’ and you cheer.”
11 And Jehovah’s ark went round the city, making one round; and they came to the camp and spent the night in camp.
12 And the first thing Joshuaʽ did in the morning, the priests took up Jehovah’s ark,
13 with seven priests carrying the seven bugle-horns before Jehovah, going along blowing the horns as they went, and the armed contingent from the east going before them and the rearguard going behind Jehovah’s ark blowing horns as they went,
14 and they went round the city once on the second day and back to the camp.
So they did six days.
15 And on the seventh day the first thing in the morning, at dawn, they went round the city this same way seven times (it was only on that day that they went round the city seven times),
16 and at the seventh time the priests blew the horns and Joshuaʽ said to the people “Cheer, because Jehovah has given you the city;
17 and the city shall be deodand to Jehovah for destruction, it and all that is in it
only the prostitute Rahab is to live, she and all that are with her in the house, because she hid the messengers we sent.
18 Only for your part beware of the deodand, that you do not covet and take any of the deodand and render the Israelite camp deodand and breed trouble for it.
19 And all silver and gold and articles of bronze and iron are sacred to Jehovah; they shall come into Jehovah’s treasury.”
20 And the people cheered, and they blew the horns, and when the people heard the horn-blast the people gave a loud cheer, and the wall fell flat and the people went up to the city every man straight in, and took the city,
21 and massacred all in the city, man and woman, boy and graybeard and cow and sheep and donkey, without quarter.
22 And to the two men who had reconnoitered the country Joshuaʽ said “Go into the prostitute woman’s house and bring out from there the woman and all that belong to her, as you swore to her.”
23 And the young men who had reconnoitered went in and brought out Rahab and her father and mother and brothers and all that belonged to her, and brought out all her clan, and left them outside the Israelite camp.
24 And the city they burned up, and all in it; only the silver and gold and the bronze and iron articles they put in the treasury of Jehovah’s house,
25 and the prostitute Rahab and her family and all that belonged to her Joshuaʽ kept alive and they have lived among the Israelites to this day because she had hid the messengers Joshuaʽ sent to reconnoiter Jericho.
26 And Joshuaʽ imposed an oath at that time, “Cursed be the man before Jehovah who stands up and fortifies the city, Jericho: with his firstborn he shall lay its foundation and with his youngest son he shall set up its gates.”
27 And Jehovah was with Joshuaʽ, and his fame was all through the country.
7:1-26
7 But the Israelites were unfaithful with regard to what had been devoted to destruction, for Achan son of Carmi, son of Zabdi, son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, took some of what was devoted to destruction.
At this Jehovah’s anger blazed against the Israelites.
2 Then Joshua sent men out from Jericho to Ai, which is close by Beth-aven and east of Bethel, telling them: “Go up and spy on the land.”
So the men went up and spied on Ai.
3 When they returned to Joshua, they told him: “Not all the people need to go up.
About two or three thousand men are enough to defeat Ai.
Do not tire out all the people by making them go, for there are only a few of them.”
4 So about 3,000 men went up there, but they had to flee from the men of Ai.
5 The men of Ai struck down 36 men, and they pursued them from outside the city gate as far as Shebarim, and they continued striking them down on the descent.
So the courage of the people melted and flowed away like water.
6 At this Joshua ripped his garments and fell with his face to the ground before the Ark of Jehovah until the evening, he and the elders of Israel, and they kept throwing dust on their heads.
7 Joshua said: “Alas, Sovereign Lord Jehovah, why did you bring this people all the way across the Jordan just to hand us over to the Amorites to be destroyed?
If only we had been satisfied to remain on the other side of the Jordan!
8 Pardon me, O Jehovah, what can I say now that Israel has retreated before his enemies?
9 When the Canaanites and all the inhabitants of the land hear about it, they will surround us and wipe out our very name from the earth, and what will you do about your great name?”
10 Jehovah replied to Joshua: “Get up!
Why are you lying on your face?
11 Israel has sinned. They have violated my covenant that I commanded them to keep.
They took some of what was devoted to destruction, stealing it and secretly putting it among their own possessions.
12 Therefore, the Israelites will not be able to stand against their enemies.
They will turn their backs and flee from their enemies, because they have become something devoted to destruction.
I will not be with you again unless you annihilate from your midst what was devoted to destruction.
13 Get up and sanctify the people!
Tell them, ‘Sanctify yourselves tomorrow, for this is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: “What is devoted to destruction is among you, O Israel.
You will not be able to stand against your enemies until you remove from your midst the thing devoted to destruction.
14 You are to present yourselves in the morning, tribe by tribe, and the tribe that Jehovah selects will come near, family by family, and the family that Jehovah selects will come near, household by household, and the household that Jehovah selects will come near, man by man.
15 And the one who is caught with the thing devoted to destruction will be burned with fire, he and all that belongs to him, because he has violated the covenant of Jehovah and because he has committed a disgraceful act in Israel.”’”
16 So Joshua rose early the next morning and had Israel come near, tribe by tribe, and the tribe of Judah was selected.
17 He had the families of Judah come near and the family of the Zerahites was selected, after which he had the family of the Zerahites come near, man by man, and Zabdi was selected.
18 Finally he had the household of Zabdi come near, man by man, and Achan son of Carmi, son of Zabdi, son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was selected.
19 Then Joshua said to Achan: “My son, please, honor Jehovah the God of Israel and make confession to him.
Tell me, please, what you have done.
Do not hide it from me.”
20 Achan answered Joshua: “For a fact I am the one who sinned against Jehovah the God of Israel, and this is what I have done.
21 When I saw among the spoil a good-looking official garment from Shinar and 200 shekels of silver and one gold bar weighing 50 shekels, I desired them, so I took them.
They are now hidden in the ground inside my tent, with the money underneath.”
22 At once Joshua sent messengers, and they ran to the tent, and there the garment was hidden in his tent, with the money underneath it.
23 So they took the things out of the tent and brought them to Joshua and all the Israelites and placed them before Jehovah.
24 Joshua and all Israel with him then took Achan the son of Zerah, the silver, the official garment, and the bar of gold, along with his sons, his daughters, his bull, his donkey, his flock, his tent, and everything that was his, and they brought them up to the Valley of Achor.
25 Joshua said: “Why have you brought disaster upon us?
Jehovah will bring disaster upon you on this day.”
With that all Israel stoned him, after which they burned them with fire.
Thus they stoned all of them.
26 And they raised a huge pile of stones over him that remains to this day.
At this Jehovah’s hot anger subsided.
That is why the name of that place is Valley of Achor to this day.
8:1-35
8 Then Jehovah said to Joshua: “Do not be afraid or be terrified.
Take with you all the fighting men and go up against Ai.
See, I have handed over to you the king of Ai, his people, his city, and his land.
2 Do to Ai and to its king just as you did to Jericho and its king, except you may plunder its spoil and its livestock for yourselves.
Set an ambush behind the city.”
3 So Joshua and all the fighting men went up against Ai. Joshua chose 30,000 mighty warriors and sent them off by night.
4 He gave them this command: “See, you are to lie in ambush behind the city.
Do not go very far from the city, and all of you be ready.
5 I and all the people with me will approach the city, and when they come out against us as before, we will retreat from them.
6 When they come out after us, we will draw them away from the city, for they will say, ‘They are retreating from us just as before.’
And we will retreat from them.
7 Then you should rise up from the ambush and capture the city; Jehovah your God will hand it over to you.
8 As soon as you have seized the city, you should set it on fire.
You should do according to Jehovah’s word.
See, I have given you your orders.”
9 Then Joshua sent them out, and they marched to the place of ambush; they took a position between Bethel and Ai, to the west of Ai, while Joshua spent that night with the people.
10 After Joshua rose up early in the morning and gathered the troops, he and the elders of Israel led them to Ai.
11 All the fighting men who were with him marched up and advanced to the front of the city.
They camped to the north of Ai, with the valley between them and Ai.
12 In the meantime, he had taken about 5,000 men and had set them as an ambush between Bethel and Ai, to the west of the city.
13 So the people set the main camp to the north of the city and the rear guard west of the city, and Joshua went that night into the middle of the valley.
14 And as soon as the king of Ai saw this, he and the men of the city hurried out early in the morning to meet Israel in battle at a certain place overlooking the desert plain.
But he did not know that there was an ambush set against him to the rear of the city.
15 When the men of Ai attacked, Joshua and all Israel fled along the road in the direction of the wilderness.
16 Then all the people who were in the city were summoned to pursue them; and as they pursued Joshua they were drawn away from the city.
17 Not a man was remaining in Ai and Bethel who did not go out after Israel.
They left the city wide open and pursued Israel.
18 Jehovah now said to Joshua: “Stretch out the javelin that is in your hand toward Ai, for into your hand I will give it.”
So Joshua stretched out the javelin that was in his hand toward the city.
19 The moment he stretched out his hand, the ambush rose up quickly from its place and ran into the city and captured it.
They immediately set the city on fire.
20 When the men of Ai turned around, they saw the smoke of the city rising to the sky, and they had no strength to flee in any direction.
Then the people who had been fleeing toward the wilderness turned on their pursuers.
21 When Joshua and all Israel saw that the ambush had captured the city and saw the smoke of the city rising, they turned around and attacked the men of Ai.
22 And the others came out of the city to meet them, so that the men of Ai were trapped in the middle, with some Israelites on this side and some on that side, and they struck them down until there was not one survivor or escapee remaining.
23 But they caught the king of Ai alive and brought him before Joshua.
24 After Israel finished killing all the inhabitants of Ai in the field, in the wilderness where they had pursued them, and every last one of them had fallen by the sword, then all Israel returned to Ai and struck it with the sword.
25 All those who fell on that day, from man to woman, amounted to 12,000, all the people of Ai.
26 Joshua did not draw back his hand with which he had stretched out the javelin until he had devoted all the inhabitants of Ai to destruction.
27 However, Israel took the livestock and the spoil of that city for themselves, according to the orders that Jehovah had given to Joshua.
28 Then Joshua burned Ai and reduced it to a permanent mound of ruins, as it remains to this day.
29 He hung the king of Ai on a stake until the evening, and as the sun was about to set, Joshua gave the order to take his dead body down from the stake.
Then they pitched it at the entrance of the city gate and raised up a great pile of stones over him, which is there to this day.
30 It was then that Joshua built an altar on Mount Ebal to Jehovah the God of Israel,
31 just as Moses the servant of Jehovah had commanded the Israelites and as it is written in the book of the Law of Moses: “An altar of whole stones on which no iron tool has been wielded.”
On it they offered up burnt offerings to Jehovah as well as communion sacrifices.
32 Then he wrote there on the stones a copy of the Law that Moses had written before the Israelites.
33 All Israel, their elders, the officers, and their judges were standing on both sides of the Ark in front of the Levitical priests who were carrying the ark of the covenant of Jehovah.
The foreign residents were there as well as the natives.
Half of them stood in front of Mount Gerizim, and the other half in front of Mount Ebal (just as Moses the servant of Jehovah had previously commanded), to bless the people of Israel.
34 After this he read aloud all the words of the Law, the blessings and the curses, according to all that is written in the book of the Law.
35 There was not a word of all that Moses had commanded that Joshua did not read aloud in front of all the congregation of Israel, including the women and children and the foreign residents who were living among them.
9 And when all the kings that side of the Jordan in the highland and the lowland and all along the beach of the great sea up to the latitude of the Lebanon heard of it, the Hittites and the Amorites and the Canaanites and the Perizzites and the Hivvites and the Jebusites,
2 they joined forces unanimously to fight Joshuaʽ and Israel.
3 And the inhabitants of Gibeon heard what Joshuaʽ had done to Jericho and the Ghai,
4 and they acted too by trickery, and went and put on false colors, and took worn-out sackcloths for their donkeys, and worn-out skins of wine, punctured and mended with puckers,
5 and patched worn-out sandals on their feet, and worn-out cloaks on their backs, and all the bread in their provisions was dried up, gone to crumbling.
6 And they went to the camp at the Gilgal to Joshuaʽ, and said to him and to the men of Israel “We have come from a distant country: now make a treaty with us.”
7 And the men of Israel said to the Hivvites “Maybe you live in among us: how should we make a treaty with you?”
8 But they said to Joshuaʽ “We are your servants.”
And Joshuaʽ said to them “Who are you, and where do you come from?”
9 And they said to him “Your servants have come from a very distant country for the fame of your God Jehovah, because we heard the report of him and all that he did in Egypt
10 and all that he did to the two kings of the Amorites on the other side of the Jordan, King Sihon of Heshbon and King ʽOg of the Bashan whose capital was ʽAshtaroth,
11 and our elders and all the inhabitants of our country said to us ‘Take provisions with you for the journey and go to meet them and say to them “We are your servants; now make a treaty with us.’”
12 This is our bread: we provisioned ourselves with it hot out of our houses on the day we went out to go to you, and now here it is dried up and gone to crumbling.
13 These are the skins of wine that we filled new, and here they are punctured.
And these are our clothes and sandals; they are worn out with the great length of the journey.”
14 And the men took some of their provisions without having asked Jehovah’s voice.
15 And Joshuaʽ made with them a treaty of peace and security for their lives, and the princes of the congregation swore to them.
16 And at the end of three days after they had made a treaty with them they heard that they were neighbors and lived in among them.
17 And the sons of Israel marched, and came to their cities on the third day, their cities being Gibeon and the Kephirah and Beeroth and Kirjath-Jeʽarim;
18 and the sons of Israel did not kill them, because the princes of the congregation had sworn to them by Israel’s God Jehovah.
And all the congregation complained against the princes;
19 but all the princes said to all the congregation “We have sworn to them by Israel’s God Jehovah, and now we cannot touch them.
20 This we will do to them, and spare their lives, and not have wrath upon us for the oath we swore to them.
21 Let them live and be wood-gatherer and water-carriers for all the congregation.”
And all the congregation did as the princes had said for them.
22 And Joshuaʽ called them and spoke to them, saying “Why have you played this trick on us, to say ‘we are very distant from you’ when you live in among us?
23 now cursed are you, you shall never cease to furnish slaves gathering wood and carrying water for the house of my God.”
24 And they answered Joshuaʽ “Because your servants had been told what commission your God Jehovah had given his servant Moses, to give you all the country and to root out before you all the inhabitants of the country; and we were in great fear for our lives on your account, and did this thing.
25 Now here we are in your hands: do with us as you think best and fittest to.”
26 And he did so for them, and delivered them out of the hands of the sons of Israel, and they did not kill them;
27 but on that day Joshuaʽ gave them to be wood-gatherers and water-carriers for the congregation and for Jehovah’s altar, as they are to this day, at the place he was to choose.
10:1-43
10 And when King Adoni-Sedek of Jerusalem heard that Joshuaʽ had taken the Ghai and destroyed it without quarter, had done to the Ghai and its king the same as he had done to Jericho and its king, and that the inhabitants of Gibeon had made peace with the Israelites and were among them,
2 he was badly frightened, because Gibeon was a great city like one of the royal capitals, and because it was larger than the Ghai and all its men were champion warriors.
3 And King Adoni-Sedek of Jerusalem sent word to King Hoham of Hebron and King Piram of Jarmuth and King Japhiaʽ of Lakish and King Debir of ʽEglon
4 “Come up to me and help me conquer Gibeon, because it has made peace with Joshuaʽ and the sons of Israel”;
5 and the five kings of the Amorites, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lakish, the king of ʽEglon, they and all their armies, came together and went up and beleaguered Gibeon and attacked it.
6 And the men of Gibeon sent word to Joshuaʽ at the camp at the Gilgal “Do not neglect your servants; come right up to us and help us and save us, because all the Amorite kings in the highland have gathered against us.”
7 And Joshuaʽ went up from the Gilgal, he and all the fighting force with him, and all the first-class men.
8 And Jehovah said to Joshuaʽ “Do not be afraid of them, because I have given them into your hands; not a man of them shall stand before you.”
9 And Joshuaʽ came upon them suddenly, having made an all-night march up from the Gilgal;
10 and Jehovah threw them into confusion before the Israelites, and they inflicted a great defeat on them at Gibeon and pursued them along the road to the place where it goes up at Beth-Horon, and cut them down clear to ʽAzekah and to Makkedah.
11 And when they ran before the Israelites, as they were on the downward road at Beth-Horon Jehovah threw great stones on them out of the sky as far as ʽAzekah, and they were more of them killed by the hailstones than the sons of Israel killed with swords.
12 Then Joshuaʽ spoke to Jehovah on the day that Jehovah gave the Amorites to be defeated before the sons of Israel, and said before the Israelites “Sun, halt at Gibeon, and moon, in Aijalon Vale!”
13 And the sun halted and the moon stood still till a nation avenged itself on its enemies.
(This is included in the Book of the Upright.)
And the sun stood still halfway across the sky and did not press on to setting for about an entire day.
14 And there was never a day like that, before or after, of Jehovah’s obeying a man; for Jehovah was fighting for Israel.
15 And Joshuaʽ, and all Israel with him, went back to the camp at the Gilgal.
16 And these five kings took flight and hid in the cave at Makkedah.
17 And Joshuaʽ was told “The five kings are found, hiding in the cave at Makkedah.”
18 And Joshuaʽ said “Roll great stones to the mouth of the cave, and station men over it to watch them,
19 but do not stop yourselves; pursue your enemies and keep cutting off their rear, give them no chance to get into their cities, because your God Jehovah has given them into your hands.”
20 But when Joshuaʽ and the sons of Israel finished slaying them by wholesale till they were all gone and the survivors had made good their escape and got into the fortified cities,
21 and all the people had come back to Makkedah to Joshuaʽ safe and sound, not a man putting out his tongue against the sons of Israel,
22 Joshuaʽ said “Open the mouth of the cave and bring these five kings out of the cave to me”;
23 and they did so, and brought these five kings out of the cave to him, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lakish, the king of ʽEglon.
24 And when they brought these kings out to Joshuaʽ, Joshuaʽ called all the men of Israel and said to the chieftains of the fighting men who had gone with him “Come here, set your feet on the necks of these kings”; and they came up and set their feet on their necks.
25 And Joshuaʽ said to them “Do not be afraid nor dismayed; courage, and do your best, because Jehovah will do the like to all your enemies with whom you are fighting.”
26 And after that Joshuaʽ struck them dead and hung them on five trees, and they hung on the trees till evening;
27 and at sunset Joshuaʽ gave orders and they took them down off the trees and threw them into the cave where they had hidden and placed great stones on the mouth of the cave, where they remain to this very day.
28 And Joshuaʽ took Makkedah that day and massacred its people, giving no quarter to anything in it that breathed, not leaving a survivor, and did to the king of Makkedah as he had done to the king of Jericho.
29 And Joshuaʽ and all Israel with him went over from Makkedah to Libnah and attacked Libnah;
30 and Jehovah gave it too, and its king, into Israel’s hands, and they massacred its people and everything in it that breathed, not leaving a survivor in it, and did to its king as they had to the king of Jericho.
31 And Joshuaʽ and all Israel with him went over from Libnah to Lakish and beleaguered it and attacked it,
32 and Jehovah gave Lakish into Israel’s hands, and they took it on the second day and massacred its people and destroyed it all without quarter, just as they had done to Libnah.
33 Then King Horam of Gezer came up to help Lakish, and Joshuaʽ defeated him and his people and cut them down till he did not leave him a survivor.
34 And Joshuaʽ and all Israel with him went over from Lakish to ʽEglon and beleaguered it and attacked it,
35 and took it that same day and massacred its people and everything in it that breathed, destroying all without quarter that same day, just as they had done to Lakish.
36 And Joshuaʽ and all Israel with him went up from ʽEglon to Hebron and attacked it,
37 and took it, and massacred its people and everything in it that breathed, not leaving a survivor, just as they had done to ʽEglon, and destroyed without quarter it and everything in it.
38 And Joshuaʽ and all Israel with him came back to Debir and attacked it,
39 and took it and its king and all its cities, and massacred their people and destroyed without quarter everything in it that breathed, not leaving a survivor; they did to Debir and its king the same as they had done to Hebron and as they had done to Libnah and its king.
40 And Joshuaʽ conquered all the country, the highland and the South and the lowland and the steeps, and all their kings, not leaving a survivor, and everything that breathed he destroyed without quarter, as Israel’s God Jehovah had commanded.
41 And Joshuaʽ conquered them from Kadesh-Barneaʽ to Ghaza, and all the Goshen country, to Gibeon;
42 and all these kings and their country Joshuaʽ took at one time, because Israel’s God Jehovah was fighting for Israel.
43 And Joshuaʽ and all Israel with him went back to the camp at the Gilgal.
11:1-23
11 And when King Jabin of Hasor heard of it he sent to King Jobab of Madon and the king of Shimron and the king of Acshaph
2 and the kings on the north, in the highland and in the Rift Valley about Kinneroth and in the lowland, and in Naphath-Dor on the west,
3 the Canaanites to east and to west and the Amorites and the Hittites and the Perizzites and the Jebusites in the highland and the Hivvites under Hermon in the Mispah country;
4 and they came out, they and all their armies with them, a great body, as numerous as the grains of sand on the seashore, and ponies and chariots in great numbers;
5 and all these kings combined and came and encamped together by Merom Water to make war with Israel.
6 And Jehovah said to Joshuaʽ “Do not be afraid of them, because at this time tomorrow I am going to have them all fallen before Israel; their ponies you shall hamstring and their chariots you shall burn up.”
7 And Joshuaʽ, and all the fighting men with him, came against them by Merom Water suddenly, and came down on them;
8 and Jehovah gave them into Israel’s hands, and they defeated them and pursued them to great Sidon and to Misrephoth-Mayim, and to Mispeh Plain on the east; and they cut them down till they did not leave them a survivor.
9 And Joshuaʽ did to them as Jehovah had told him to, hamstrung their ponies and burned up their chariots.
10 And, as before, at that time Joshuaʽ took Hasor and killed its king in the fighting, for Hasor used to be the head of all these kingdoms.
11 And they massacred every person in it, giving no quarter; none that breathed was left; and Hasor they burned down.
12 And all the capitals of these kings, and all their kings, Joshuaʽ took, and massacred their people without quarter, as Jehovah’s servant Moses had commanded.
13 Only all the cities that are standing on their old sites Israel did not burn, but that Joshuaʽ burned Hasor alone.
14 And all the booty of these cities, and the cattle, the sons of Israel plundered for themselves; only all the human beings they massacred till they had rooted them out; they left none that breathed.
15 As Jehovah had commanded his servant Moses, so Moses had commanded Joshuaʽ, and so Joshuaʽ did; he did not take off a thing from all that Jehovah had commanded Moses.
16 And Joshuaʽ took all this country, the highland and all the South and all the Goshen country and the lowland and the Rift Valley, and the highland of Israel and its lowland,
17 from Bald Mountain that goes up to Seʽir to Baal-Gad in the Lebanon Plain under Mount Hermon; and all their kings he took and struck them dead.
18 Joshuaʽ was a long time making war with all these kings.
19 There was not a city that made peace with the sons of Israel except the Hivvites that lived in Gibeon: they took all by war,
20 because it was determined by Jehovah to make them headstrong to face the war with Israel in order that they might be destroyed without quarter and have no claim to mercy, because the purpose was to root them out as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
21 And at that time Joshuaʽ went in and exterminated the ʽAnakites out of the highland: out of Hebron, out of Debir, out of ʽAnab, and out of all the highland of Judah and out of all the highland of Israel; Joshuaʽ destroyed them without quarter with their cities.
22 There were no ʽAnakites left in the Israelite country; only in Ghaza, in Gath, and in Ashdod did any remain.
23 And Joshuaʽ took all the country, just as Jehovah had promised Moses; and Joshuaʽ gave it to the Israelites by their divisions, tribe by tribe, as an estate.
And the country was at rest from war.
12:1-24
12 And these are the kings of the country, whom the sons of Israel defeated and took possession of their country, on the east side of the Jordan, from Arnon Arroyo to Mount Hermon and all the eastern Rift Valley:
2 King Sihon of the Amorites, whose capital was Heshbon, ruler from ʽAroer on the brink of Arnon Arroyo, and the middle of the arroyo, and half Gilead, to Jabbok Arroyo, the boundary of the Bene-ʽAmmon,
3 and the Rift Valley to the eastern shore of the Sea of Kinneroth and to the eastern shore of the Dead Sea, the Salt Sea, on the way to Beth-ha-Jeshimoth, and to the south under the steeps of the Pisgah.
4 And King ʽOg of the Bashan, one of the remnant of the ogres, whose capitals were ʽAshtaroth and Edrei,
5 and ruler in Mount Hermon and in Salcah and in all the Bashan to the boundary of the Geshurites and the Maʽacathites, and half Gilead, bordering on King Sihon of Heshbon.
6 Jehovah’s servant Moses and the sons of Israel defeated them, and Moses gave it to the Reubenites and the Gadites and half the tribe of Manasseh as their possession.
7 And these are the kings of the country that Joshuaʽ and the sons of Israel conquered on the west side of the Jordan, from Baal-Gad in the Lebanon Plain to Bald Mountain that goes up to Seʽir, and Joshuaʽ gave it to the tribes of Israel as a possession according to their divisions:
8 in the highland and the lowland and the Rift Valley and the steeps and the wilderness and the South, the Hittites, the Amorites, and the Canaanites, the Perizzites, the Hivvites, and the Jebusites:
9 the king of Jericho, one; the king of the Ghai beside Bethel, one;
10 the king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebron, one;
11 the king of Jarmuth, one; the king of Lakish, one;
12 the king of ʽEglon, one; the king of Gezer, one;
13 the king of Debir, one; the king of Geder, one;
14 the king of Hormah, one; the king of ʽArad, one;
15 the king of Libnah, one; the king of ʽAdullam, one;
16 the king of Makkedah, one; the king of Bethel, one;
17 the king of Tappuah, one; the king of Hepher, one;
18 the king of Aphek in the Sharon, one;
19 the king of Madon, one; the king of Hasor, one;
20 the king of Shimron-Meron, one; the king of Acshaph, one;
21 the king of Taʽanac, one; the king of Megiddo, one;
22 the king of Kedesh, one; the king of Jokneʽam in Carmel, one;
23 the king of Dor in Naphoth-Dor, one; the king of nations in the mark, one;
24 the king of Tirsah, one; total, thirty-one kings.
13:1-33
13 And when Joshuaʽ was an old man, far gone in years, Jehovah said to him “You are an old man, far gone in years, and the country to a very great extent remains to be taken possession of.
2 This is the country that remains: all the marks of the Philistines, and all the Geshurites,
3 from the Delta River on the frontier of Egypt to the northern boundary of ʽEkron (it counts as Canaanite), the five Sarns of the Philistines, the Ghazaite, the Ashdodite, the Ashkelonite, the Gathite, and the ʽEkronite, and the ʽAvvites
4 on the south; all the Canaanite country, from Meʽarah, which belongs to the Phenicians, to Aphek, to the boundary of the Amorites;
5 and the Gebalite country and all the Lebanon to the eastward, from Baal-Gad under Mount Hermon to Lebo-Hamath.
6 All the inhabitants of the highland, from the Lebanon to Misrephoth-Mayim, all the Phenicians, I will dispossess before the sons of Israel; only allot it to the Israelites as estate, as I commanded you to.
7 Now apportion this country as estate: to the nine tribes and the half-tribe Manasseh you shall give it from the Jordan to the great sea where the sun sets; the great sea shall bound it.”
8 To the two tribes and the half-tribe Manasseh Moses gave on the east side of the Jordan; Jehovah’s servant Moses gave them
9 from ʽAroʽer on the brink of Arnon Arroyo and the city in the middle of the arroyo, and all the level from Medeba to Dibon,
10 and all the cities of King Sihon of the Amorites, whose capital was Heshbon, to the boundary of the Bene-ʽAmmon,
11 and Gilead and the territory of the Geshurites and the Maacathites, and all Mount Hermon, and all the Bashan to Salcah,
12 all the kingdom of King ʽOg of the Bashan whose capitals were ʽAshtaroth and Edrei he was left over of the remnant of the ogres; Moses defeated them and dispossessed them.
13 But the sons of Israel did not dispossess the Geshurites and the Maʽacathites, but Geshur and Maʽacah live in the midst of Israel to this day.
14 Only to the tribe of the Levites he gave no estate: Israel’s God Jehovah is their estate as he promised them.
15 And this is the assignment that Moses assigned to the sons of Israel in the Moab flats on the other side of the Jordan at Jericho.
16 and they had their boundary from ʽAroer on the brink of Arnon Arroyo and the city in the middle of the arroyo, and all the level by Medeba,
17 Heshbon and all its cities in the level, Dibon and Bamoth-Baal and Beth-Baal-Meon
18 and Jahsah and Kedemoth and Mephaath
19 and Kirjathaim and Sibmah and Sereth-hash-Shahar on Vale Mountain
20 and Beth-Peghor and the steeps of the Pisgah and Beth-ha-Jeshimoth
21 and all the cities of the level and all the kingdom of King Sihon of the Amorites, whose capital was Heshbon, whom Moses defeated along with the princes of Midian, Evi and Rekem and Sur and Hur and Rebaʽ, Sihon’s dukes, the natives of the country;
22 and the soothsayer Balaam the son of Beʽor the sons of Israel killed with the sword over the slain.
23 And the boundary of the sons of Reuben was the Jordan as boundary. This is the estate of the sons of Reuben clan by clan, the cities and their villages.
24 And Moses gave to the tribe of Gad, the sons of Gad, clan by clan;
25 and they had as their territory Jaʽzer and all the cities of Gilead and half the country of the Bene-ʽAmmon, up to ʽAroʽer facing Rabbah,
26 and from Heshbon to Mispeh Fell and Betonim, and from Mahanaim to the boundary of Lodebar,
27 and in the vale Beth-Haram and Beth-Nimrah and Succoth and Saphon, the rest of the kingdom of King Sihon of Heshbon, with the Jordan as boundary, to the edge of the Sea of Kinnereth, on the east side of the Jordan.
28 This is the estate of the sons of Gad clan by clan, the cities and their villages.
29 And Moses gave to half the tribe of Manasseh clan by clan;
30 and their boundary was, from Mahanaim, all the Bashan, all the kingdom of King ʽOg of the Bashan, and all the Havvoth of Jair in the Bashan, sixty cities,
31 and half of Gilead, and ʽAshtaroth and Edreʽi, ʽOg’s capitals in the Bashan, for the sons of Makir the son of Manasseh, for half the sons of Manasseh, clan by clan.
32 This is what Moses assigned in the Moab flats on the east side of the Jordan at Jericho.
33 But to the tribe of Levi Moses gave no estate: Israel’s God Jehovah is their estate as he promised them.
14:1-15
14 And this is what the sons of Israel were assigned in Canaan, what Priest Eleazar and Joshuaʽ the son of Nun and the heads of families of the tribes assigned to the sons of Israel;
2 their assignment was by lot, as Jehovah had commanded by Moses, to the nine tribes and the half-tribe,
3 because Moses had given the assignment of the two and a half tribes on the other side of the Jordan, and the Levites were given no assignment among them.
4 For the sons of Joseph had come to be two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim, and they gave the Levites no share in the country except cities to live in and their glebes for their stock and means.
5 As Jehovah had commanded Moses, so the sons of Israel did, and divided the country.
6 And the sons of Judah approached Joshuaʽ at the Gilgal, and Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenazite said to him “You know the word Jehovah spoke to Moses the man of God about you and me at Kadesh-Barneaʽ.
7 I was forty years old when Jehovah’s servant Moses sent me from Kadesh-Barneaʽ to reconnoiter the country, and I brought him back word as I honestly thought,
8 but my brothers who had gone up with me melted down the people’s hearts while I altogether followed my God Jehovah.
9 And Moses swore that day ‘The country your feet trod on shall belong to you and to your sons forever as estate because you altogether followed my God Jehovah.’
10 And now here has Jehovah kept me alive, as he promised, these forty-five years since Jehovah spoke this word to Moses, while Israel went in the wilderness; and now here I am today eighty-five years old.
11 I am still strong today as I was on the day Moses sent me; my strength now is the same as my strength then, for fighting and for going out and in.
12 Now give me this highland that Jehovah promised on that day, because you heard on that day that there were ʽAnakites there and great fortified cities; perhaps Jehovah will be with me and I shall dispossess them as Jehovah promised.”
13 And Joshuaʽ blessed him and gave Hebron to Caleb the son of Jephunneh as estate;
14 that is how Hebron came to belong to Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenazite to this day, since he had altogether followed Israel’s God Jehovah.
15 And the former name of Hebron was Kirjath-Arbogh; it was the headquarters of the ʽAnakites.
15:1-63
15 And the lot for the tribe of the sons of Judah, clan by clan, was to the boundary of Edom in the south of the wilderness of Sin, at its southern extremity.
2 And they had their southern boundary from the end of the Salt Sea, from the inlet that points south;
3 and it went out to a point south of Scorpion Pass and over to Sin and up south of Kadesh-Barneaʽ and over to Hesron and up to Addar and around to the Karkaʽ,
4 and over to ʽAsmon and out to Egypt Arroyo, and the termination of the boundary was at the sea: this is to be your south boundary.
5 And the east boundary was the Salt Sea to the end of the Jordan. And the boundary for the north border was from the inlet of sea at the mouth of the Jordan;
6 and the boundary went up to Beth-Hoglah and over north of Beth-ha-ʽArabah; and the boundary went up to Reuben’s son Bohan’s stone;
7 and the boundary went up to Debir from Trouble Vale and bent toward the Gilgal opposite Red Pass on the south of the arroyo; and the boundary went over to the ʽEn-Shemesh water and had its termination at ʽEn-Rogel.
8 And the boundary went up to Ben-Hinnom’s Valley, to the southern front of the Jebusites, that is, Jerusalem; and the boundary went up to the crest of the mountain along Hinnom’s Valley on the west, at the west end of Ghost Hollow.
9 And the boundary curved from the crest of the mountain to the spring of Nephtoah Water and went out to the peak of Ghephron Mountain; and the boundary curved to Baalah, that is, Kirjath-Jearim.
10 And the boundary went round westward of Baalah to Seir Mountain, and over to the northern ledge of Jearim Mountain, that is, Kesalon, and down to Beth-Shemesh and over to Timnah.
11 And the boundary went out to the northern front of ʽEkron. And the boundary curved to Shikkeron and went over to the Baalah highland and out to Jabneel; and the termination of the boundary was at the sea.
12 And the west boundary was the great sea as boundary.
This is the boundary of the sons of Judah all round, clan by clan.
13 And to Caleb the son of Jephunneh was given a share in the middle of the sons of Judah by Jehovah’s direction to Joshuaʽ, Kirjath-Arbogh the headquarters of the ʽAnakites, that is, Hebron;
14 and Caleb dispossessed from there the three sons of the ʽAnak, She-shai and Ahiman and Talmai, the breed of the ʽAnak.
15 And from there he went up against the inhabitants of Debir (the name of Debir formerly being Kirjath-Sepher);
16 and Caleb said “To the one who conquers and takes Kirjath-Sepher I will give my daughter ʽAcsah as wife”;
17 and Ghothniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb’s younger brother, took it, and Caleb gave him his daughter ʽAcsah as wife.
18 And when she came she instigated him to ask her father for land; and she dismounted from her donkey, and Caleb said to her “What is the matter?”
19 and she said “Give me a blessing, because you have put me in the South: give me bowls of water.”
And he gave her Upper Gulloth and Nether Gulloth.
20 This is the estate of the tribe of the sons of Judah, clan by clan.
21 And the cities on the frontier of the tribe of the sons of Judah toward the boundary of Edom, in the South, were Kabseel and Gheder and Jagur
22 and Kinah and Dimonah and ʽAdʽadah
23 and Kedesh and Hasor and Ithnan-Ziph
24 and Telem and Baʽaloth
25 and Hasor-Hadattah and Kirjath-Hesron (that is, Hasor-
26 Amam) and Shemaʽ and Moladah
27 and Hasar-Gaddah and Heshmon and Beth-Pelet
28 and Hasar-Shuʽal and Beer-Shebaʽ and its dependencies,
29 Baʽalah and ʽIjim and ʽEsem
30 and Eltolad and Kesil and Hormah
31 and Siklag and Madmannah and Sansannah
32 and Lebaoth and Shilhim and ʽEn-Rimmon: total twenty-nine cities and their villages.
33 In the lowland: Eshtaol and Soreah and Ashnah
34 and Zanoah and ʽEn-Gannim, Tappuah and the ʽEnam,
35 Jarmuth and ʽAdullam, Socoh and ʽAzekah
36 and Shagharaim and ʽAdithaim and the Gederah and Gederothaim, fourteen cities and their villages;
37 Senan and Hadashah and Migdal-Gad
38 and Dilean and the Mispeh and Joktheel,
39 Lakish and Boskath and ʽEglon
40 and Cabbon and Lahmas and Kithlish
41 and Gederoth, Beth-Dagon and Naʽamah and Makkedah, sixteen cities and their villages;
42 Libnah and ʽEther and ʽAshan
43 and Iphtah and Ashnah and Nesib
44 and Keilah and Aczib and Mareshah, nine cities and their villages;
45 ʽEkron and its dependencies and villages
46 from ʽEkron westward, everything along the steeps and their villages,
47 Ashdod and its dependencies and villages, Ghaza and its dependencies and villages, to Egypt Arroyo, and the great sea as boundary.
48 And in the highland: Shamir and Jattir and Socoh
49 and Dannah and Kirjath-Sannah (that is, Debir)
50 and ʽAnab and Eshtemoh and Ghanim
51 and Goshen and Holon and Giloh, eleven cities and their villages;
52 Arab and Dumah and Eshean
53 and Janum and Beth-Tappuah and Aphekah
54 and Humtah and Kirjath-Arbogh (that is, Hebron) and Sighor, nine cities and their villages;
55 Ma’on, Carmel and Ziph and Juttah
56 and Jezreʽel and Jokdeam and Zanoah,
57 the Cain, Gibeah and Timnah, ten cities and their villages;
58 Halhul, Beth-Sur and Gedor
59 and Maʽarath and Beth-ʽAnoth and Eltekon, six cities and their villages;
60 Tekoaʽ and Ephrathah (that is, Bethlehem) and Peghor and ʽEtam and Kolan and Tetam and Sores and Kerem and Gallim and Bether and Menohoh, eleven cities and their villages; Kirjath-Baal (that is, Kirjath-Jeʽarim) and the Rabbah, two cities and their villages.
61 In the wilderness: Beth-ha-ʽArabah, Middin and Secacah
62 and the Nibshan and Salt City and ʽEn-Gedi, six cities and their villages.
63 And the Jebusites, who lived in Jerusalem, the sons of Judah could not dispossess, and the Jebusites live with the sons of Judah in Jerusalem to this day.
16:1-10
16 And for the sons of Joseph the lot went out from the Jordan at Jericho, eastward of Jericho Water, to the wilderness, up from Jericho to the highland of Bethel,
2 and out from Bethel to Luz, and over to the Arkite boundary, ʽAtaroth,
3 and down west to the Japhletite boundary, to the boundary of Lower Beth-Horon, and to Gezer, and its termination was at the sea.
4 And the sons of Joseph had their estates assigned, Manasseh and Ephraim.
5 And the territory of the sons of Ephraim was clan by clan; and the boundary of their estate on the east was ʽAtaroth-Addar, to Upper Beth-Horon, 6 and the boundary terminated at the sea.
The Micmethath on the north, and the boundary went round east to Taanath, Shiloh, and over it east of Janohah
7 and down from Janohah to ʽAtaroth and Naʽarathah, and came against Jericho, and terminated at the Jordan.
8 From Tappuah the boundary went west to Kanah Arroyo, and its termination was at the sea.
This was the estate of the tribe of the sons of Ephraim clan by clan,
9 this and the cities set apart for the sons of Ephraim in the middle of the estate of the sons of Manasseh, all the cities and their villages.
10 But they did not dispossess the Canaanites that lived in Gezer, and the Canaanites live among the Ephraimites to this day and have become subject to servile forced labor.
17 And the lot for the tribe of Manasseh was as follows: because he was Joseph’s firstborn, Manasseh’s firstborn Makir the father of Gilead, because they were men of war, had Gilead and the Bashan.
2 And for the rest of Manasseh’s sons, clan by clan, the sons of Abiezer and the sons of Helek and the sons of Asriel and the sons of Shekem and the sons of Hepher and the sons of Shemidaʽ
these are the male sons of Manasseh the son of Joseph, clan by clan;
3 but Silpahad the son of Hepher the son of Gilead the son of Makir the son of Manasseh had no sons, but daughters, the names of his daughters being these, Mahlah and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirsah,
4 and they drew near before Priest Eleazar and Joshuaʽ the son of Nun and the princes with the words “Jehovah commanded Moses to give us an estate among our brothers,” and by Jehovah’s direction he gave them an estate among their father’s brothers
5 Manasseh’s pales fell ten of them, besides the country of Gilead and the Bashan on the other side of the Jordan,
6 because Manasseh’s daughters were assigned estate among their brothers, and the rest of Manasseh’s sons had the country of Gilead.
7 And the boundary of Manasseh was from Asher-ham-Micmethah in front of Shekem, and the boundary went to the south to the inhabitants of ʽEn-Tappuah
8 (the Tappuah country belonged to Manasseh, but Tappuah, on the boundary of Manasseh, to the sons of Ephraim),
9 and the boundary went down to Kanah Arroyo, south of the arroyo, these cities belonged to Ephraim in the middle of the cities of Manasseh, and the boundary of Manasseh was north of the arroyo, and its termination was at the sea;
10 southward Ephraim’s and northward Manasseh’s, and the sea was its boundary. And they came against Asher on the north and Issacar on the east;
11 and in Issacar and Asher Manasseh had Beth-Shean and its dependencies and Ibleam and its dependencies and the inhabitants of Dor and its dependencies and the inhabitants of ʽEn-Dor and its dependencies and the inhabitants of Taʽanac and its dependencies and the inhabitants of Megiddo and its dependencies, the three Naphaths;
12 but the sons of Manasseh could not dispossess these cities, and the Canaanites persisted in living in this country,
13 and when the sons of Israel grew strong they put the Canaanites to forced labor; they did not dispossess them.
14 And the sons of Joseph spoke to Joshuaʽ, saying “How came you to give us an estate of a single lot and a single portion when we are a great people, Jehovah having so blessed us?”
15 And Joshuaʽ said to them “If you are a great people go up to the Badlands and cut out for yourselves there in the country of the Perizzites and the ogres, because the highland of Ephraim crowds you.”
16 And the sons of Joseph said “The highland will not suffice for us, and all the Canaanites that live in the Vale country have iron chariots among them, those in Beth-Shean and its dependencies and those in the Vale of Jezreel.”
17 But Joshuaʽ said to the house of Joseph, to Ephraim and Manasseh, “You are a great people and have great strength; you shall not have a single lot,
18 because you shall have a highland; because it is badlands, you shall carve it out and have its issues, because you will dispossess the Canaanites though they do have iron chariots, because you are stronger.”
18 And all the congregation of the sons of Israel assembled at Shiloh and established the Tent of Meeting there, with the subjugated country before them.
2 And there were left among the sons of Israel, who had not divided their estates, seven tribes.
3 And Joshuaʽ said to the sons of Israel “How much are you going to lag back from going in to take possession of the country your God Jehovah gave to your fathers?
4 Nominate three men to each tribe whom I may send to start out and explore the country and list it in proportion to the estates they are to have and come to me;
5 and divide it into seven shares, Judah standing fast in his territory on the south and the house of Joseph standing fast in their territory on the north;
6 and do you list the country in seven shares and bring them here to me and I will cast lots for you here before our God Jehovah.
7 For the Levites have no share among you, because Jehovah’s priesthood is their estate; and Gad and Reuben and half the tribe of Manasseh have taken their estates on the east side of the Jordan, what Jehovah’s servant Moses gave to them.”
8 And the men started out and went; and Joshuaʽ commissioned the ones that went to list the country, saying “Go and explore the country and list it and come back to me, and here I will throw lots for you before Jehovah at Shiloh.”
9 And the men went and passed through the country and listed it in a book city by city into seven shares, and came to Joshua in the camp at Shiloh,
10 and Joshuaʽ threw lots for them at Shiloh before Jehovah.
11 And the lot of the tribe of the sons of Benjamin, clan by clan, came up; and the boundary of their lot went out between the sons of Judah and the sons of Joseph.
12 And they had their boundary, for the north quarter, from the Jordan; and the boundary went up to the northern front of Jericho and up into the highland westward, coming out in the wilderness of Beth-Aven;
13 and the boundary went over from there to Luz, to the southern front of Luz, that is, Bethel; and the boundary went down to ʽAtaroth-Addar on the mountain south of Lower Beth-Horon.
14 And the boundary curved round to the west border south of the mountain facing Beth-Horon on the south, and its termination was at Kirjath-Baal, that is, Kirjath-Jearim, city of the sons of Judah; this was the west border.
15 And the south border was from the edge of Kirjath-Jearim; and the boundary went out west and out to the spring of Nephtoah Water,
16 and the boundary went down to the edge of the mountain facing Ben-Hinnom’s Valley in Ghost Hollow on the north, and down to Hinnom’s Valley to the south front of the Jebusites and down to ʽEn-Rogel,
17 and curved north and went out to ʽEn-Shemesh and out to Geliloth opposite Red Pass and down to Reuben’s son Bohan’s stone
18 and over to the north front of Beth-ha-ʽArabah and down to the Rift Valley,
19 and the boundary went over to the north front of Beth-Hoglah, and the termination of the boundary was at the north inlet of the Salt Sea, at the south extremity of the Jordan.
This was the south boundary.
20 And the Jordan bounded it on the east border.
This was the estate of the sons of Benjamin boundary by boundary all round, clan by clan.
21 And the cities for the tribe of the sons of Benjamin clan by clan were Jericho and Beth-Hoglah and ʽEmek-Kesis
22 and Beth-ha-Arabah and Semaraim and Bethel
23 and the ʽAvvim and the Parah and Ghophrah
24 and Kephir-ha-Ammonai and ʽOphni and Gebaʽ, twelve cities and their villages,
25 Gibeon and the Ramah and Beeroth
26 and the Mispeh and the Kephirah and the Mosah
27 and Rekem and Irpeel and Taralah
28 and Sela-ha-Eleph and the Jebusites (that is, Jerusalem) and Gibeath and Kirjath-Jeʽarim, fourteen cities and their villages.
This was the estate of the sons of Benjamin clan by clan.
19:1-51
19 And the second lot came out for Simeon, for the tribe of the sons of Simeon clan by clan; and their estate was in the middle of the estate of the sons of Judah.
2 And they had in their estate Beer-Shebaʽ and Shemaʽ and Moladah
3 and Hasar-Shuʽal and Balah and ʽEsem
4 and Eltolad and Bethul and Hormah
5 and Siklag and Beth-ham-Marcaboth and Hasar-Susah
6 and Beth-Lebaoth and Sharuhen, thirteen cities and their villages,
7 ʽEn-Rimmon and Token and ʽEther and ʽAshan, four cities and their villages,
8 and all the villages round these cities to Baalath-Beer, Ramath-Negeb.
This was the estate of the tribe of the sons of Simeon clan by clan.
9 The estate of the sons of Simeon was out of the pale of the sons of Judah, because the share of the sons of Judah was too large for them and the sons of Simeon were assigned part in the middle of their estate.
10 And the third lot came up for the sons of Zebulun clan by clan; and the boundary of their estate reached to Sarid.
11 And their boundary went up westward and to Marealah, and came against Dabbesheth, and came up to the arroyo alongside Jokneʽam;
12 and going back, from Sarid eastward, toward the sunrise along the boundary of Kisloth-Tabor and out to the Daberath and up to Japhiaʽ,
13 and from there over eastward, sunriseward, to Gath Hepher, to ʽEth-Kasin, and out to Rimmonah and curving to the Neʽah,
14 and the boundary went round it to the north of Hannathon, and its termination was at Iphtah-El Valley.
15 And Kattath and Nahalal and Shimron and Idalah and Beth-Lehem, twelve cities and their villages.
16 This was the estate of the sons of Zebulun clan by clan, these cities and their villages.
17 And for Issacar the fourth lot came out, for the sons of Issacar clan by clan;
18 and their boundary was at Jezreʽel and the Kesulloth and Shunem
19 and Hapharaim and Shion and Anaharah
20 and the Rabbith and Kishjon and Ebes
21 and Remeth and ʽEn-Gannim and ʽEn-Haddah and Beth-Passes;
22 and the boundary came against Tabor and Shahasimah and Beth-Shemesh, and the termination of their boundary was at the Jordan: sixteen cities and their villages.
23 This was the estate of the tribe of the sons of Issacar clan by clan, the cities and their villages.
24 And the fifth lot came out for the tribe of the sons of Asher clan by clan;
25 and their boundary was Helkath and Hali and Beten and Acshaph
26 and Alammelec and ʽAdʽad and Mishal, and came against Carmel at the sea and against Shihor-Libnath,
27 and went back east to Beth-Dagon, and came against Zebulun and the north side of Iphtah-El Valley; and the boundary came to Beth-ha-ʽEmek and Neʽiel and went out to Cabul on the left,
28 and ʽEbron and Rehob and Hammon and Kanah, to great Sidon;
29 and the boundary went back to the Ramah and clear to the fortress-spring of Tyre; and the boundary went back to Hosah, and its termination was at the sea; and Mahalab and Aczib
30 and ʽUmmah and Aphek and Rehob; twenty-two cities and their villages.
31 This was the estate of the tribe of the sons of Asher clan by clan, these cities and their villages.
32 And for the sons of Naphtali the sixth lot came out, for the sons of Naphtali clan by clan;
33 and their boundary was from Heleph, from the Besaʽannim Oak, and Adami-han-Nekeb and Jabneel to Lakkum, and its termination was at the Jordan;
34 and the boundary went back westward to Aznoth-Tabor and out from there to Hukkok, and came against Zebulun on the south and against Asher on the west and against the Jordan swamp on the east.
35 And the side fortified cities, Ser and Hammath-Rakkath and Kinnereth
36 and Adamah and the Ramah and Hasor
37 and Kedesh and Edreʽi and ʽEn-Hasor
38 and Iron and Migdal-El-Horem and Beth-ʽAnath and Beth-Shemesh, nineteen cities and their villages.
39 This was the estate of the tribe of the sons of Naphtali clan by clan, the cities and their villages.
40 For the tribe of the sons of Dan clan by clan the seventh lot came out;
41 and the boundary of their estate was Soreah and Eshtaol and ʽIr-Shemesh
42 and Shaʽalbin and Aijalon and Ithlah
43 and Elon and Timnathah and ʽEkron
44 and Eltekeh and Gibbethon and Baʽalath
45 and Jehud and Bene-Berak and Gath-Rimmon
46 and Jarkon Water and the Rakkon, together with the boundary, fronting Joppa.
47 This was the estate of the tribe of the sons of Dan clan by clan, these cities and their villages.
And the sons of Dan did not crowd out the Amorites who carried on hostilities with them in the highland, and the Amorites did not let them get down to the vale and made the territory of their share too cramped for them; and the sons of Dan went up and attacked Leshem and took it and massacred its people and took possession of it and settled there, and named Leshem “Dan” after their father Dan.
48 And the Amorites persisted in living in Aijalon and in Shaʽalbin; but the hand of Ephraim grew heavy on them and they became subject to forced labor.
49 And they finished having the country assigned boundary by boundary; and the sons of Israel gave Joshuaʽ the son of Nun an estate in their central part;
50 by Jehovah’s direction they gave him the city he asked for, Timnath-Heres in the highland of Ephraim, and he fortified the city and lived in it.
51 These are the estates Priest Eleazar and Joshuaʽ the son of Nun and the heads of families of the tribes of the sons of Israel assigned by lot at Shiloh before Jehovah at the door of the Tent of Meeting.
So they finished dividing the country.
20:1-9
20 And Jehovah spoke to Joshuaʽ, saying
2 “Tell the sons of Israel ‘Institute the asylum cities of which I spoke to you by Moses,
3 for the homicide who strikes down a person inadvertently
4 to flee to;
5 you shall have them as an asylum from the blood-reclaimer,
6 and the homicide shall not die by the blood-reclaimer till he stands before the congregation for trial.’”
7 And they hallowed Kedesh in the Mark, in the highland of Naphtali, and Shekem in the highland of Ephraim, and Kirjath-Arbogh (that is, Hebron) in the highland of Judah.
8 And on the east side of the Jordan at Jericho they instituted Beser in the wilderness, in the level, out of the tribe of Reuben, and Ramoth in Gilead out of the tribe of Gad, and Golan in the Bashan out of the tribe of Manasseh.
9 These were the appointed cities for all the sons of Israel and for the immigrants that lived among them, for everyone who struck down a person inadvertently to flee to and not die by the blood-reclaimer till he stood before the congregation.
21:1-45
21 And the heads of families of the Levites approached Priest Eleazar and Joshuaʽ the son of Nun and the heads of families of the tribes of the sons of Israel
2 and spoke to them at Shiloh in Canaan, saying “Jehovah gave commandment through Moses to give us cities to live in, and their glebes for our cattle.”
3 And the sons of Israel gave the Levites out of their estate, by Jehovah’s direction, these cities and their glebes:
4 And the lot came out for the clan of the Kehathites; and Priest Aaron’s sons had, out of the Levites, out of the tribe of Judah and out of the tribe of the Simeonites and out of the tribe of Benjamin, by lot thirteen cities;
5 and the remaining sons of Kehath had out of the clans of the tribe of Ephraim and out of the tribe of Dan and out of half the tribe of Manasseh by lot ten cities.
6 And the sons of Gershon had out of the clans of the tribe of Issacar and out of the tribe of Asher and out of the tribe of Naphtali and out of the half-tribe of Manasseh in the Bashan by lot thirteen cities.
7 And the sons of Merari had, clan by clan, out of the tribe of Reuben and out of the tribe of Gad and out of the tribe of Zebulun twelve cities.
8 And the sons of Israel gave the Levites these cities and their glebes, as Jehovah commanded through Moses, by lot.
9 And they gave out of the tribe of the sons of Judah and out of the tribe of the sons of Simeon these cities which are to be named:
10 to the sons of Aaron, out of the clans of the Kehathites, out of the sons of Levi, (because they had the first lot,)
11 they gave Kirjath-Arbogh the headquarters of the ʽAnak, that is, Hebron, in the highland of Judah, and its glebe around it,
12 but the range of the city and its villages they gave to Caleb the son of Jephunneh as his property.
13 And to the sons of Priest Aaron they gave the city of asylum for the homicide, Hebron, and its glebes, and Libnah and its glebes,
14 and Jattir and its glebe, and Eshtemoaʽ and its glebes,
15 and Holon and its glebe, and Debir and its glebe,
16 and ʽAshan and its glebe, and Juttah and its glebe, and Beth-Shemesh and its glebe, nine cities out of these two tribes;
17 and out of the tribe of Benjamin, Gibeon and its glebe, and Gebaʽ and its glebe,
18 ʽAnathoth and its glebe, and ʽAlmon and its glebe, four cities:
19 the total of the cities of Aaron’s sons, the priests, was thirteen cities and their glebes.
20 And for the Levite clans of the sons of Kehath, those of the sons of Kehath who were left, the cities of their lot were, out of the tribe of Ephraim
21 they gave them the city of asylum for the homicide, Shekem, and its glebe, in the highland of Ephraim, and Gezer and its glebe,
22 and Kibsaim and its glebe, and Beth-Horon and its glebe, four cities;
23 and out of the tribe of Dan, Eltekeh and its glebe, Gibbethon and its glebe,
24 Aijalon and its glebe, Gath-Rimmon and its glebe, four cities;
25 and out of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Taʽanac and its glebe, Ibleʽam and its glebe, two cities:
26 total ten cities and their glebes for the clans of the rest of the sons of Kehath.
27 And the sons of Gershon, out of the clans of the Levites, had out of the half-tribe of Manasseh the city of asylum for the homicide, Golan in the Bashan, and its glebe, and Beʽeshterah and its glebe, two cities;
28 and out of the tribe of Issacar, Kishjon and its glebe, Daberath and its glebe,
29 Jarmuth and its glebe, ʽEn-Gannim and its glebe, four cities;
30 and out of the tribe of Asher, Mishal and its glebe, ʽAbdon and its glebe,
31 Helkath and its glebe, Rehob and its glebe, four cities;
32 and out of the tribe of Naphtali the city of asylum for the homicide, Kedesh in the Mark, and its glebe, and Hammoth-Dor and its glebe, and Kartan and its glebe, three cities: 33 the total of the cities of the Gershonites, clan by clan, was thirteen cities and their glebes.
34 And the clans of the sons of Merari, the rest of the Levites, had, out of the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneʽam and its glebe, Kartah and its glebe,
35 Dimnah and its glebe, Nahalal and its glebe, four cities; and on the other side of the Jordan at Jericho
36 out of the tribe of Reuben the city of asylum for the homicide, Beser in the wilderness, and its glebe, and Jahsah and its glebe,
37 Kedemoth and its glebe, and Mephaʽath and its glebe, four cities;
38 and out of the tribe of Gad the city of asylum for the homicide, Ramoth in Gilead, and its glebe, and Mahanaim and its glebe,
39 Heshbon and its glebe, Jaʽzer and its glebe, four cities.
40 All the cities belonged to the sons of Merari clan by clan, the rest of the clans of the Levites; and their lot was twelve cities.
41 The total of the cities of the Levites in the midst of the property of the sons of Israel was forty-eight cities and their glebes,
42 these cities being each with its glebes around it, so for all these cities.
43 And Jehovah gave Israel all the country he had sworn to give to their fathers, and they took possession of it and lived in it;
44 and Jehovah gave them rest on all sides, just as he had sworn to their fathers, and of all their enemies not a man stood before them; Jehovah gave all their enemies into their hands.
45 Of all the good promise Jehovah had made to the house of Israel not a point failed; all came true.
22:1-34
22 Then Joshuaʽ called the Reubenites and the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh
2 and said to them “You have kept all the commands Jehovah’s servant Moses gave you, and obeyed every order of mine;
3 you have not deserted your brothers, these many days. To this day you have kept the charge of your God Jehovah’s commandments.
4 And now Jehovah has brought your brothers to rest as he promised them; so now about-face and go to your homes in the country you have as your property, which Jehovah’s servant Moses gave to you on the other side of the Jordan.
5 Only be very careful to live up to the commandment and instruction which Jehovah’s servant Moses enjoined upon you, loving your God Jehovah and walking in all his ways and keeping his commandments and holding fast to him, and worshiping him with all your hearts and souls.”
6 And Joshuaʽ blessed them, and they went to their homes.
7 And Moses had given in the Bashan to half the tribe of Manasseh, and to half of it Joshuaʽ gave on the west side of the Jordan with their brothers.
And when Joshuaʽ sent them away to their homes and blessed them,
8 they went back to their homes with great substance, with a very great quantity of stock, with silver and gold and bronze and iron, and with a very great quantity of clothing, and divided the booty from their enemies with their brothers.
9 And the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh went back from Shiloh in Canaan, from the company of the sons of Israel, to go to Gilead, the country of their property appropriated to them by Jehovah’s direction through Moses.
10 And they came to the marks of the Jordan, in Canaan, and there the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh built an altar by the Jordan, an imposing altar.
11 And the sons of Israel heard “There have the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh built an altar toward Canaan in the marks of the Jordan, on the sons of Israel’s side,”
12 and all the congregation of the sons of Israel assembled at Shiloh to go up in an expedition against them.
13 And the sons of Israel sent to Gilead, to the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh, Pinehas the son of Priest Eleazar
14 and ten princes with him, one prince from each family of all the tribes of Israel; each was one of the heads of families of the thousands of Israel.
15 And they came to Gilead to the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh and spoke with them, saying
16 “Says all Jehovah’s congregation, What does this unfaithfulness mean which you have been guilty of toward the God of Israel, going back today from following Jehovah, in that you have built yourselves an altar to break your allegiance to Jehovah today?
17 Was the offense of Peghor a little thing for us, that from which we are not cleansed to this day, and by which there came the calamity in Jehovah’s congregation,
18 and are you turning back from following Jehovah? and when you break your allegiance to Jehovah today, tomorrow he will be incensed at all the congregation of Israel.
19 If the country you have as your property is unclean, just come over to the country that is Jehovah’s property, where Jehovah’s tabernacle is present, and receive a property among us; but do not break your allegiance to Jehovah and put us in the position of breaking ours by your building yourselves an altar other than the altar of our God Jehovah.
20 ʽAcan the son of Zabdi was guilty of unfaithfulness in the deodand, and did there not come a wrath against all the congregation of Israel? and he did not perish a single man in his guilt.”
21 And the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh answered to the heads of the thousands of Israel “Jehovah is God of gods.
22 Jehovah is God of gods.
He knows, and let Israel know: if it be in breach of allegiance or if it be in unfaithfulness to Jehovah let him not help us this day,
23 building us an altar to turn back from following Jehovah; or if it be to offer burnt-offerings and grain-offerings on, or if it be to do welfare-sacrifices on, Jehovah himself look into it;
24 if it be not for anxiety about a certain point that we have done this, thinking ‘Tomorrow your sons will say to ours “What has Israel’s God Jehovah to do with you,
25 Jehovah having put a boundary between you sons of Reuben and of Gad and us, the Jordan? you have no share in Jehovah,” and your sons will make ours leave off fearing Jehovah.’
26 And we thought ‘Let us make ourselves a model of the altar,’ not for burnt-offering and not for sacrifice,
27 because it is a witness between you and us, and between our generations after us, for rendering Jehovah’s worship before him with our burnt-offerings and our sacrifices and our welfare-sacrifices, and your sons are not to say to ours tomorrow ‘you have no share in Jehovah.’
28 And we thought ‘And when they say so to us and to our generations tomorrow, we will say “See the model of Jehovah’s altar that our fathers made, not for burnt-offering and not for sacrifice, because it is a witness between you and us.”’
29 Away from us with the thought of breaking our allegiance to Jehovah or turning back today from following Jehovah, building an altar for burnt-offering, grain-offering, and sacrifice, apart from our God Jehovah’s altar before his tabernacle.”
30 And Priest Pinehas and the princes of the congregation who were with him heard the words the sons of Reuben and of Gad and of Manasseh spoke, and approved of them.
31 And Priest Pinehas said to the sons of Reuben and of Gad and of Manasseh “Today we know that Jehovah is among us; in that you were not guilty of this unfaithfulness toward Jehovah, you then delivered the sons of Israel out of Jehovah’s hands.”
32 And Priest Pinehas and the princes returned from conferring with the sons of Reuben and of Gad in Gilead to the sons of Israel in Canaan and brought them back word;
33 and the sons of Israel approved of the word, and the sons of Israel blessed God and did not think of going up on an expedition against them to ravage the country the sons of Reuben and of Gad lived in.
34 And the sons of Reuben and of Gad called the altar ʽEd, “because it is an ʽed, witness, between us that Jehovah is our God.”
23:1-16
23 And long after Jehovah had given Israel rest from all their enemies on all sides, Joshuaʽ, being an old man, far gone in years,
2 called all Israel, its elders and its chiefs and its judges and its marshals, and said to them “I am an old man, far gone in years;
3 and you have seen everything that your God Jehovah did to all these nations on your account, because it was your God Jehovah that fought for you.
4 See, I have allotted these remaining nations to you as estate, tribe by tribe, from the Jordan and all the nations I exterminated and the great sea where the sun sets.
5 And your God Jehovah will himself push them out of your way and dispossess them from before you, and you shall take possession of their country as your God Jehovah promised you;
6 and you are to be very determined to take care and live up to everything that is written in the code of Moses, not turning off from it to right or to left,
7 not going in among these nations that remain with you, nor mentioning the names of their gods nor putting an oath by them nor worshiping them nor doing reverence to them,
8 but sticking to your God Jehovah, as you have done it to this day
9 and Jehovah has dispossessed before you great and numerous nations, and not a man has stood before you to this day;
10 one man of you would chase a thousand, because it was your God Jehovah that fought for you as he had promised you.
11 And you are to keep a sharp watch on your ownselves to love your God Jehovah,
12 because if you do turn back and adhere to the rest of these nations that remain with you and intermarry with them and go in among them and they among you,
13 you are to know positively that your God Jehovah will do no more of dispossessing these nations from before you, and they will become to you a trap and a snare, and a whip on your sides and thorns in your eyes, till you perish off this good soil your God Jehovah has given you.
14 Here I am today going the way of all the earth, and you know in all your hearts and souls that not one point of all the good things your God Jehovah promised about you has failed;
15 it all came true for you, not one point of it failed. And as all the good word your God Jehovah promised about you has come true to you, so will Jehovah make all the bad word come true to you till he roots you out from this good soil that he gave you,
16 when you overstep Jehovah’s covenant that he enjoined on you and go and worship other gods and do reverence to them, and Jehovah is angry with you and you perish quickly off the good country he gave you.”
24:1-33
24 And Joshuaʽ brought together all the tribes of Israel at Shekem and summoned the elders of Israel and its chiefs and judges and marshals, and they took their stand before God.
2 And Joshuaʽ said to all the people “Says Israel’s God Jehovah, Of old your forefathers lived on the other side of the River, Terah the father of Abraham and of Nahor, and worshiped other gods.
3 And I took your father Abraham from the other side of the River and had him go throughout Canaan, and I made him prolific and gave him Isaac
4 and gave Isaac Jacob and ʽEsau, and gave ʽEsau the highland of Seʽir to take possession of, while Jacob and his sons went down to Egypt.
5 And I sent Moses and Aaron and smote the Egyptians with what I did among them,
6 and afterward I brought you out of Egypt; and you came to the sea, and the Egyptians pursued your fathers with chariots and cavalry at the Red Sea,
7 and they cried out to Jehovah, and he placed a mass of darkness between you and the Egyptians and brought the sea on them, and it covered them, and your eyes saw what I had done to the Egyptians; and you lived in the wilderness a long time.
8 And I brought you to the country of the Amorites who lived on the other side of the Jordan; and they made war with you, and I gave them into your hands, and you took possession of their country, and I rooted them out before you.
9 And the king of Moab, Balak the son of Sippor, stood up and made war on Israel, and called in Balaam the son of Beʽor to misspeak you;
10 but I was not willing to listen to Balaam, and he positively blessed you, and I delivered you out of his hands.
11 And you crossed the Jordan and came to Jericho, and the burghers of Jericho made war on you, and the Amorites and the Perizzites and the Canaanites and the Hittites and the Girgashites and the Hivvites and the Jebusites, and I gave them into your hands.
12 And I sent before you hornets which expelled them before you, the twelve kings of the Amorites, not by your sword or bow.
13 And I gave you a country you had not labored on, and cities you had not built, and you settled in them; it is vineyards and olive-trees which you did not plant that you are eating from.
14 Now fear Jehovah and worship him wholeheartedly and loyally, and clear away the gods your forefathers worshiped on the other side of the River and in Egypt, and worship Jehovah.
15 And if you do not like to worship Jehovah, make your choice today whom you will worship, whether the gods your forefathers on the other side of the River worshiped or the gods of the Amorites whose country you are living in; but I and my family will worship Jehovah.”
16 And the people answered “Away with the thought of our leaving Jehovah to worship other gods,
17 for it was our God Jehovah that brought us up out of Egypt and guarded us through all the distance we went and all the peoples we passed among,
18 and expelled before us the Amorites that lived in the country; we too will worship Jehovah, because he is our God.”
19 And Joshuaʽ said to the people “You will not be able to worship Jehovah, because he is a holy God; he is a jealous deity who will not pardon your crimes and sins;
20 for you will leave Jehovah and worship foreign gods, and he will turn back and do you harm and exterminate you after he had done you good.”
21 And the people said to Joshuaʽ “No, we will worship Jehovah.”
22 And Joshuaʽ said to the people “You are witnesses to your bargain, that you have made your choice of Jehovah, to worship him.
23 Now clear away the foreign gods you have among you and bend your hearts to Israel’s God Jehovah.”
24 And the people said to Joshuaʽ “We will worship our God Jehovah and obey him.”
25 And Joshuaʽ made an agreement with the people that day, and established a usage and law for them at Shekem.
26 And Joshuaʽ wrote these terms in the book of the code of Moses, and took a great stone and set it up there under the oak at Jehovah’s sanctuary;
27 and Joshuaʽ said to all the people “There, we will have this stone for a witness to our bargain, because it had heard all Jehovah’s words that he spoke with us and will be a witness to your bargain so that you may not cheat your God Jehovah.”
28 And Joshuaʽ sent the people away to their estates.
29 And after this Jehovah’s servant Joshuaʽ the son of Nun died at the age of a hundred and ten years,
30 and they buried him within the bounds of his estate at Timnath-Heres in the highland of Ephraim, north of Gaʽash Mountain.
31 And Israel worshiped Jehovah throughout Joshuaʽ’s time and throughout the time of the elders who survived after Joshuaʽ who had known all Jehovah’s work which he had done for Israel.
32 And Joseph’s bones, which the sons of Israel had brought up out of Egypt, they buried at Shekem in the lot of land that Jacob had bought from the sons of Hamor the father of Shekem for a hundred kesitahs and that had become Joseph’s estate.
33 And Eleazar the son of Aaron died, and they buried him on his son Pinehas’s hill which had been given to him in the highland of Ephraim.
Judges
1:1-36
1 And after Joshuaʽ’s death the sons of Israel put the question to Jehovah “Whom shall we have go up against the Canaanites to begin with, and attack them?”
2 And Jehovah said “Judah shall go up: I have given the land into his hands.”
3 And Judah said to his brother Simeon “Come up with me into my allotment to attack the Canaanites, and so will I go with you into your allotment”; and Simeon went with him.
4 So Judah went up, and Jehovah gave the Canaanites and Perizzites into his hands, and they defeated them at Bezek, killing ten thousand men.
5 And they found Adoni-Bezek at Bezek and attacked him, and defeated the Canaanites and the Perizzites;
6 and Adoni-Bezek fled, and they ran him down and laid hold of him and cut off his thumbs and great toes,
7 and Adoni-Bezek said “Seventy kings have picked up their food under my table with their thumbs and great toes cut off; God has paid me back just what I had done.”
And they brought him to Jerusalem and he died there.
8 And the sons of Judah attacked Jerusalem and took it, and massacred the people and put the torch to the city.
9 And afterward the sons of Judah went down to attack the Canaanites who lived in the highlands and in the South and in the lowlands;
10 and Judah went against the Canaanites who lived in Hebron (the name of Hebron formerly being Kirjath-Arbogh) and killed Sheshai and Ahiman and Talmai.
11 And from there he went against the inhabitants of Debir (the name of Debir formerly being Kirjath-Sepher);
12 and Caleb said “To the one who conquers and takes Kirjath-Sepher I will give my daughter ʽAcsah as wife”;
13 and Ghothniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb’s younger brother, took it, and Caleb gave him his daughter ʽAcsah as wife.
14 And when she came she instigated him to ask her father for land: and she dismounted from her donkey, and Caleb said to her “What is the matter?”
15 and she said to him “Give me a blessing, because you have put me in the South: give me bowls of water.”
And Caleb gave her Upper Gulloth and Nether Gulloth.
16 And Hobab the Cainite, Moses’s father-in-law, went up from the City of Palms with the sons of Judah to the wilderness of Judah, in the South about ʽArad, and went and lived with the ʽAmalekites.
17 And Judah went with his brother Simeon, and they defeated the Canaanites who lived in Sephath; and they destroyed it without quarter, and named the city Hormah.
18 And Judah took Ghaza and its territory, and Ashkelon and its territory, and ʽEkron and its territory;
19 and Jehovah was with Judah, and they took possession of the highland for they were not able to dispossess the inhabitants of the vale, because they had iron chariots.
20 And they gave Caleb Hebron, as Moses had promised, and he dispossessed from there the three sons of the ʽAnak.
21 And the sons of Benjamin did not dispossess the Jebusites who lived in Jerusalem, and the Jebusites lived with the sons of Benjamin in Jerusalem to this day.
22 And the house of Joseph too went up to Bethel, and Jehovah was with them.
23 And the house of Joseph made a reconnaissance at Bethel (the name of the city formerly was Luz);
24 and the sentinels saw a man come out of the city, and said to him “Show us the way into the city and we will befriend you.”
25 And he showed them the way into the city; and they massacred the people of the city, but let the man and his clan go.
26 And the man went to the country of the Hittites and built a city and named it Luz; that is its name to this day.
27 And Manasseh did not dispossess Beth-Shean and its dependencies, and Taʽanac and its dependencies, and the inhabitants of Dor and its dependencies, and the inhabitants of Jibleʽam and its dependencies, and the inhabitants of Megiddo and its dependencies, but the Canaanites persisted in living in this country.
28 And when Israel grew strong they subjected them to forced labor; they did not dispossess them.
29 And Ephraim did not dispossess the Canaanites who lived in Gezer, but the Canaanites lived among them in Gezer.
30 Zebulun did not dispossess the inhabitants of Kitron and the inhabitants of Nahalol, but the Canaanites lived among them and became subject to forced labor.
31 Asher did not dispossess the inhabitants of ʽAcco and the inhabitants of Sidon, and Ahlab and Aczib and Helbah and Aphik and Rehob;
32 and the Asherites lived among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the country, but had not dispossessed them.
33 Naphtali did not dispossess the inhabitants of Beth-Shemesh and the inhabitants of Beth-ʽAnath, but lived among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the country, and the inhabitants of Beth-Shemesh and Beth-ʽAnath became subject to forced labor under them.
34 And the Amorites crowded the sons of Dan into the highland; for they did not let them get down to the vale,
35 and the Amorites persisted in living in Har-Heres, in Aijalon, and in Shaʽalbim.
But the hand of the house of Joseph grew heavy, and they became subject to forced labor.
36 And the territory of the Amorites was from Scorpion Pass, from Selaʽ upward.
2 And the Angel of Jehovah went up from the Gilgal to Bokim, and said “. . .
I led you up from Egypt, and brought you into the country that I had sworn to your fathers I would, and said ‘I will not break my covenant with you forever; 2 and you shall make no treaties with the inhabitants of this country; you shall pull down their altars’
and you did not obey me; what is this you have done?
3 So I have said I would not drive them out before you, but you shall have them as foes and their gods as a snare.”
4 And when the Angel of Jehovah said these things to all the sons of Israel, the people raised their voices and wept;
5 and they named the place Bokim, “Weepers,” and sacrificed there to Jehovah.
6 And Joshuaʽ dismissed the people, and the sons of Israel went home to their farms to take possession of the country.
7 And the people worshiped Jehovah throughout Joshuaʽ’s life, and throughout the life of the elders who outlived Joshuaʽ, who had seen all Jehovah’s great work that he did for Israel.
8 And Jehovah’s servant Joshuaʽ the son of Nun died at the age of a hundred and ten years,
9 and they buried him on his estate at Timnath-Heres in the highland of Ephraim, to the north of Gaash Mountain.
10 And so were all that generation gathered to their fathers, and there arose after them another generation that did not know Jehovah nor the work that he did for Israel.
11 And the sons of Israel did what displeased Jehovah, and worshiped the Baals;
12 and they left their fathers’ God Jehovah, who had brought them out of Egypt, and followed other gods from among the gods of the peoples around them, and did reverence to them, and provoked Jehovah;
13 and they left Jehovah and worshiped the Baal and the ʽAshtarts.
14 And Jehovah was angry with Israel and gave them into the hands of pillagers, and they pillaged them; and he sold them into the hands of their enemies on all sides, and they could no longer stand before their enemies.
15 In everything they undertook Jehovah’s hand was on them for mischief, as Jehovah had threatened and as Jehovah had sworn to them; and they were in great straits.
16 And Jehovah raised up judges, and they saved them out of the hands of their pillagers;
17 and neither did they listen to their judges, but prostituted themselves to follow other gods and did reverence to them.
They quickly left the road their fathers had gone in, obeying Jehovah’s commandments; they did not do so.
18 And when Jehovah raised up judges for them Jehovah was with the judge and saved them out of the hands of their enemies throughout the time of the judge, because Jehovah repented at their groaning over their oppressors and molesters.
19 And at the judge’s death they went back to doing more viciously than their fathers, following other gods, worshiping them and doing them reverence; they did not drop any part of their practices, and of their stubborn course.
20 And Jehovah was angry with Israel and said “Since this nation have violated my covenant which I commanded their fathers, and not been obedient to me,
21 I on my part will not dispossess before you any more of the nations that Joshuaʽ left when he died,”
22 in order to test Israel by them, whether they kept his ways, walking in them, as their fathers had kept them, or not.
23 And Jehovah left these nations, not dispossessing them quickly, and did not give them into Joshuaʽ’s hands.
3 And these are the nations that Jehovah left to test Israel by, all who had not known any of the Canaanite wars;
2 only for the sake of the generations of the sons of Israel, to teach them war only those who had not known them before:
3 the Five Sarns of the Philistines, and all the Canaanites and the Phenicians and the Hivvites that live on Mount Lebanon, from Mount Baal-Hermon to Lebo-Hamath;
4 and they were to test Israel by, to know whether they would obey Jehovah’s commandments which he had given to their fathers by Moses.
5 And the sons of Israel lived in the midst of the Canaanites, the Hittites and the Amorites and the Perizzites and the Hivvites and the Jebusites,
6 and took their daughters for wives and gave their own daughters to their sons, and worshiped their gods.
7 And the sons of Israel did what displeased Jehovah, and forgot their God Jehovah and worshiped the Baals and the Asherahs;
8 and Jehovah was angry with Israel and sold them into the hands of Cushan-Risheathaim, the king of Aram-Naharaim; and the sons of Israel were subject to Cushan-Risheathaim eight years.
9 And the sons of Israel cried to Jehovah, and Jehovah raised up for the sons of Israel a deliverer who saved them, Ghothniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb’s younger brother;
10 and the spirit of Jehovah came upon him, and he judged Israel and went out to war, and Jehovah gave King Cushan-Risheathaim of Aram into his hands, and his hands bore hard on Cushan-Risheathaim;
11 and the country was quiet forty years.
And Ghothniel the son of Kenaz died,
12 and the sons of Israel did more of what displeased Jehovah, and Jehovah strengthened King ʽEglon of Moab against Israel because of their doing what displeased Jehovah;
13 and he drew together around him the Bene-ʽAmmon and ʽAmalek, and went and defeated Israel and took possession of the City of Palms;
14 and the sons of Israel were subject to King ʽEglon of Moab eighteen years.
15 And the sons of Israel cried to Jehovah, and Jehovah raised them up a deliverer, Ehud the son of Gera the Benjamite, a left-handed man.
And the sons of Israel were sending a tribute by him to King ʽEglon of Moab;
16 and Ehud made himself a sword with two edges, a foot long, and belted it on under his brigandine, on his right hip.
17 And he presented the tribute to King ʽEglon of Moab (who was a very fat man);
18 and when he had finished presenting the tribute he dismissed the people who carried the tribute,
19 but he turned back from the carved stones at the Gilgal and said “Your majesty, I have some private business with you”; and he said “Quiet!” and all who were standing in his presence went out from it,
20 and Ehud went in to him, he sitting in his cool roof-chamber alone.
And Ehud said “I have an errand from God to you”; and he rose from his chair.
21 And Ehud put his left hand in and took the sword from his right hip and ran it into ʽEglon’s abdomen,
22 and it went in hilt and all, and the fat closed over the blade, because he had not drawn the sword out of the abdomen;
23 and Ehud went out on the ledge, and shut the doors of the roof-chamber on him and locked them.
24 And when he had gone out ʽEglon’s servants came and saw how the doors of the roof-chamber were locked, and thought “He must be easing himself in the cool closet”;
25 and they waited till they felt uncomfortable, and found that he did not open the doors of the roof-chamber; and they took the key and opened them, and found their sovereign down on the ground dead.
26 And Ehud made his escape while they were delaying, and had passed the carved stones and got safe to Seʽirah.
27 And when he got there he blew the ram-horn in the highland of Ephraim, and the sons of Israel came down from the highland with him, he at their head;
28 and he said to them “Come down after me, because Jehovah has given your enemies the Moabites into your hands,” and they came down after him and took the fords of the Jordan against the Moabites and did not let a man cross,
29 and made havoc of the Moabites at that time, killing about ten thousand men every man of standing and every man of energy; not one escaped;
30 and Moab was humbled under the hands of Israel on that day. And the country was quiet eighty years.
31 And after him was Shamgar the son of ʽAnath, and he made havoc of the Philistines, killing six hundred men with an oxgoad; and he too saved Israel.
4 And the sons of Israel did more of what displeased Jehovah, Ehud being dead,
2 and Jehovah sold them into the hands of Jabin, the king of the Canaanites, who reigned at Hasor; his general was Sisera, whose residence was Harosheth-haggoyim;
3 and the sons of Israel cried out to Jehovah, because he had nine hundred iron chariots; and for twenty years he oppressed the sons of Israel by main force.
4 And Deborah, a prophetess, the wife of Lappidoth, judged Israel at that time:
5 she sat under Deborah’s Palms between Ramah and Bethel, in the highland of Ephraim, and the sons of Israel went up to her for justice.
6 And she sent and called Barak the son of Abinoʽam from Kedesh in Naphtali, and said to him “The order has come from Israel’s God Jehovah, ‘Go march on Mount Tabor, taking with you ten thousand men of the sons of Naphtali and of the sons of Zebulun;
7 and I will draw to you, to Kishon Arroyo, Jabin’s general Sisera and his chariots and his host, and I will give them into your hands.’”
8 And Barak said to her “If you go with me I will go, but if you do not I will not.”
9 And she said “Go with you I will; there will be no glory for you, though, in the campaign on which you go, because Jehovah will sell Sisera into a woman’s hands.”
And Deborah rose and went with Barak to Kedesh;
10 and Barak called out Zebulun and Naphtali to Kedesh; and ten thousand men went up at his back, and Deborah went up with him.
11 And Heber the Cainite had separated from the Cainites, the sons of Moses’s father-in-law Hobab, and pitched his tent up to the Besaʽanim Oak near Kedesh.
12 And they told Sisera that Barak the son of Abinoʽam had gone up to Mount Tabor;
13 and Sisera called out all the chariots he had, nine hundred iron chariots, and all the men he had with him, from Harosheth-haggoyim to Kishon Arroyo.
14 And Deborah said to Barak “Up, for this is the day Jehovah has given Sisera into your hands Jehovah has gone out before you!”
And down went Barak from Mount Tabor, with ten thousand men behind him;
15 and Jehovah routed Sisera and all his chariots and all his army unsparingly before Barak, and Sisera dismounted from his chariot and fled on foot,
16 while Barak pursued the chariots and the army clear to Harosheth-haggoyim, and all Sisera’s army fell without quarter: not one was left.
17 And Sisera fled on foot to the tent of Jael the wife of Heber the Cainite, because King Jabin of Hasor and the family of Heber the Cainite were at peace.
18 And Jael went out to meet Sisera and said to him “In here, sir, in here with me; do not be afraid”; and Sisera went in with her into the tent, and she covered him with the rug;
19 and he said to her “Let me have a drink of water, I am thirsty,” and she opened the bag of milk and let him drink and covered him up.
20 And he said to her “Stand at the door of the tent, and if anyone comes and asks you ‘Is there anyone here?’ say ‘No.’”
21 And Jael the wife of Heber the Cainite got her tent-peg, and took the hammer in her hand, and went in quietly where he was and drove the peg into his temples, and through into the ground, while he was fast asleep and exhausted, and killed him.
22 And up came Barak pursuing Sisera, and Jael went out to meet him and said to him “Come, and I will show you the man you are looking for”; and he went into her tent and found Sisera lying dead with the peg in his temple.
23 And Jehovah humbled King Jabin of the Canaanites that day before the sons of Israel;
24 and the hands of the sons of Israel pressed harder and harder on King Jabin of the Canaanites till they had wiped out King Jabin of the Canaanites.
5:1-31
5 And Deborah and Barak the son of Abinoam sang on that day
2 “For untrimmed hair in Israel,for ready volunteers, bless Jehovah!
3 Listen, kings; give ear, potentates; I will sing to Jehovah, I!
I will make music to Israel’s God Jehovah.
4 Jehovah, when you came out from Seir, when you paced forth from the wolds of Edom, The earth quaked; aye, the heavens tossed; aye, the clouds dripped water,
5 The mountains streamed at Jehovah’s presence, this is Sinai,at the presence of Israel’s God Jehovah.
6 In the days of Shamgar the son of ʽAnath,in the days of Jael, roads ceased and wayfarers went by devious roads;
7 Prowess ceased in Israel, ceased till you arose, Deborah, till you arose, mother in Israel.
8 He would choose new gods; then barley bread; Shield was not to be seen, nor spear, among forty thousand in Israel.
9 My heart goes out to the marshals of Israel, who volunteered among the people; bless Jehovah!
10 Riders of roan asses, sitters on carpets, walkers by the way, review it!
11 At the sound of archers between the water-holes there they shall celebrate Jehovah’s loyal work, his loyal work of prowess in Israel.
Then Jehovah’s people went down to the gates!
12 Arouse, arouse, Deborah; rouse, rouse, chant your song; up, Barak; take your captives, son of Abinoʽam!
13 Then survivors came down for heroes, Jehovah’s people came down for me among champions:
14 Out of Ephraim those whose root is in the vale,your brother Benjamin among your kinsfolk; Out of Makir marshals came down, and out of Zebulun wielders of the mustering-baton.
15 And the chiefs in Issacar were with Deborah, and Issacar, so Barak; in the vale they poured along at his back.
At Reuben’s water-channels great were the resolves of minds.
16 Why did you sit in the fork of the paths to hear the whistles of the flocks?
By Reuben’s water-channels great were the searchings of minds.
17 Gilead was settled on the other side of the Jordan, and Dan was on foreign ships;Asher was living by the beach,settled at its landings.
18 Zebulun was a people that flouted their lives to die,and Naphtali, on the heights of the range.
19 Kings came, they fought; then fought the kings of the Canaanites at Taʽanac by the Megiddo Water;no winnings of silver did they take.
20 The stars fought out of the sky,out of their orbits they fought with Sisera.
21 The Kishon torrent swept them off,streaked with their blood was the Kishon torrent,stout souls were set on their way.
22 Then they pounded the ponies’ heels,his heroes went galloping, galloping.
23 Curse Meroz, says Jehovah’s Angel, curse its inhabitants with a downright curse, Because they did not come to help Jehovah,to help Jehovah among the champions.
24 Most blessed of women be Jael the wife of Heber the Cainite, of women in tents most blessed:
25 Water he asked, milk she has given, in a noble bowl she has brought clabber.
26 Her hand she puts to the peg, her right hand to the toilers’ mallet,And strikes Sisera, smashes his head, shatters and drives through his temple-bone.
27 Between her legs he plunged, fell, lay; between her legs he plunged, fell; where he plunged, there he fell smitten.
28 At the window, at the lattice,Sisera’s mother stood looking out and talking all the time:‘Why is it his chariotry is so long in coming?why is it the hoofbeats of his chariots are so late?’
29 The wisest of her ladies answered her,she herself echoed back her words,
30 ‘O, they are finding booty, dividing it, a slave-girl or two per man, A booty of dyed cloths for Sisera,a booty of dyed cloths, embroidery,a dyed cloth, double embroidery, for my neck booty!’
31 So may all your enemies perish, Jehovah! and may those who love him be like the rising of the sun at its brightest!”
And the country was quiet forty years.
6:1-40
6 And the sons of Israel did what displeased Jehovah, and Jehovah gave them into the hands of the Midianites seven years.
2 And the Midianites’ hand bore hard on Israel: for fear of the Midianites the sons of Israel made themselves the tunnels in the mountains, and the caves and the fastnesses.
3 And if Israel sowed a crop, up would come the Midianites and the ʽAmalekites and the Eastern Beduins, and come up over them;
4 and they camped on them and pastured off the growth of the country, till you come to Ghaza; and they would leave no subsistence in Israel, nor sheep nor ox nor donkey.
5 For they would come up stock and all, and their tents would come in as thick as grasshoppers; and they came into the country to pasture it off.
6 And Israel was brought very low because of the Midianites, and the sons of Israel cried to Jehovah.
7 And when the sons of Israel cried to Jehovah about the Midianites
8 Jehovah sent a prophet to the sons of Israel, and he said to them “Says Israel’s God Jehovah, ‘I brought you out from the slave-quarters,
9 and delivered you out of the hands of all your oppressors, and drove them out before you and gave you their country;
10 and I said to you “I am your God Jehovah: you shall not fear the gods of the Amorites in whose country you are settling” and you did not obey me.’”
11 And the Angel of Jehovah came and stood under the terebinth-tree at Ghophrah, that belonged to Joash the Abiʽezrite; and when his son Gideon was beating out wheat in the winepress to get it out of the way of the Midianites,
12 the Angel of Jehovah appeared to him and said “Jehovah is with you, brave champion.”
13 And Gideon said to him “Well, sir, if Jehovah is with us, why has all this come upon us? and where are all his wonders that our fathers have told us of, saying ‘Did not Jehovah bring us up out of Egypt?’ but now Jehovah has abandoned us and put us into Midian’s hands.”
14 And Jehovah turned to him and said “Go with that strength of yours and save Israel out of Midian’s hands I send you!”
15 And he said to him “O, sir, with what shall I save Israel? my thousand is the weakest in Manasseh, and I the most insignificant of my family.”
16 And Jehovah said to him “Because I will be with you, and you shall strike Midian down like one man.”
17 And he said to him “If I have found favor in your eyes, let me have a token that it is you talking with me:
18 do not stir from here till I come to you bringing out my offering and lay it before you”; and he said “I will stay till you come back.”
19 And Gideon went in and killed and cooked a kid and made a bushel of meal into matzoth; the flesh he put in his basket and the broth in his pot, and brought it out to him under the terebinth-tree and presented it.
20 And the Angel of God said to him “Take the flesh and the matzoth and lay them on yonder rock, and pour out the broth”; and he did so.
21 And the Angel of Jehovah put out the end of the staff that he had in his hand and touched the flesh and the matzoth, and fire came up out of the stone and consumed the flesh and the matzoth, and the Angel of Jehovah passed away from his sight,
22 and Gideon saw that it was the Angel of Jehovah. And Gideon said “O, O, my lord Jehovah! I have seen the Angel of Jehovah face to face!”
23 And Jehovah said to him “All is well for you: do not be afraid, you shall not die.”
24 And Gideon built an altar to Jehovah there, and called it “Jehovah All-well”; it exists to this day at Ghophrath-Abi-ha-ʽEzri.
25 And that night Jehovah said to him “Take your father’s wall-steer; and a steer, the second, of seven years, and demolish your father’s altar of the Baal and cut down the asherah over it,
26 and build an altar of your God Jehovah on top of this citadel-rock with the coursed stones, and take the second steer and offer a burnt-offering with the wood of the asherah you cut down.”
27 And Gideon took ten men, slaves of his, and did as Jehovah had told him; and, as he was too much afraid of his family and the men of the city to do it by day, he did it by night.
28 And in the morning the men of the city found that the altar of the Baal had been pulled down and the asherah over it cut down, and the second steer offered on the newly-built altar;
29 and they said to each other “Who did this thing?” and they inquire and investigated, and it was said “Joash’s son Gideon did this thing.”
30 And the men of the city said to Joash “Bring your son out to die, because he has pulled down the altar of the Baal and cut down the asherah over it.”
31 But Joash said to all who stood around him “Are you to contend for the Baal or succor him? let the one who contend for him be put to death.
Till morning! if he is a god, let him contend for himself because he pulled down his altar.”
32 And on that day he named him Jerubbaal, meaning “The Baal contend with him, because he pulled down his altar.”
33 And all the Midianites and the ʽAmalekites and the Eastern Beduins had come together and crossed and encamped in the vale of Jezreʽel;
34 and the spirit of Jehovah took possession of Gideon, and he blew the ram-horn, and the Abiʽezrites came out in arms behind him;
35 and he sent messengers throughout Manasseh, and the Manassites too came out in arms behind him; and he sent messengers through Asher and Zebulun and Naphtali, and they came up to meet them.
36 And Gideon said to God “If you do mean to save Israel by my hands, as you promised,
37 here I am placing a fleece of wool on the threshing-floor: if there is dew on the fleece alone, and all over the ground it is dry, I shall know that you will save Israel by my hands as you promised.”
38 And it was so: he squeezed the fleece the first thing in the morning and ran out dew out of the fleece, a bowlful of water.
39 And Gideon said to God “Do not be angry with me, and let me speak just once more.
Let me try with the fleece only once more: have it dry on the fleece alone, and all over the ground let there be dew.”
40 And God did so that night, and it was dry on the fleece alone, and all over the ground there was dew.
7 And Jerubbaal (that is, Gideon) and all the people who were with him went in the morning and encamped by Panic Spring; and he had the Midianites’ camp on the north, from Moreh Hill, in the vale.
2 And Jehovah said to Gideon “There are too many of the people that are with you for me to give the Midianites into their hands, for fear Israel should brag against me ‘My own hands gave me the victory’;
3 now proclaim to the people ‘Whoever is afraid and panicky, let him flit back from the highland of Gilead.’”
And twenty-two thousand of the people went back, and ten thousand were left.
4 And Jehovah said to Gideon “There are still too many of the people: have them go down to the water and I will weed them out for you there; and what I tell you shall go with you, shall, and all that I tell you shall not go with you, shall not.”
5 And he had the people go down to the water; and Jehovah said to Gideon “Everyone that laps from the water with his tongue, as a dog does, you shall set apart, and everyone that kneels down to drink.”
6 And the number that lapped with hand to mouth was three hundred men; and all the rest of the people knelt down to drink water.
7 And Jehovah said to Gideon “By the three hundred men that lapped I will give you the victory, and give the Midianites into your hands; and let all the people go home to their places.”
8 And they took the people’s provisions in their hands, and their ram-horns; and he sent home all the men of Israel, and kept the three hundred men.
And he had the Midianites’ camp under him in the vale.
9 And that night Jehovah said to him “Get up and descend on the camp, because I have given it into your hands.
10 And if you are afraid to descend on it, you and your man Purah go down to the camp
11 and hear what they say, and afterward you will have courage and will descend on the camp.”
And he and his man Purah went down to the edge of the men under arms in the camp.
12 And the Midianites and the ʽAmalekites and all the Eastern Beduins had dropped into the vale in numbers like a swarm of locusts: there was no counting their camels, as numerous as the grains of sand on the seashore.
13 And when Gideon came, there was a man telling his comrade a dream; and he said “Here I have had a dream that a barley-bread bannock was tumbling over and over in the Midianite camp, and it came to the tent and knocked it upside down.”
14 And his comrade answered “That can be nothing else than the sword of Gideon the son of Joash, the men of Israel; God has given into their hands the Midianites and all the camp.”
15 And when Gideon heard the account of the dream, and its explanation, he did reverence, and went back to the camp of Israel and said “Get up: Jehovah has given the Midianite camp into your hands.”
16 And he divided the three hundred men into three columns, and gave them all ram-horns to carry, and empty jars, and torches inside the jars;
17 and he said to them “Take your cue from me, and do the same: when I get to the edge of the camp, do just as I do:
18 I and all who are with me will blow the ram-horn, and you shall blow the horns too all around the camp, and say ‘For Jehovah and for Gideon!’”
19 And Gideon, and a hundred men who were with him, arrived at the edge of the camp at the beginning of the middle watch; the sentries had just been set; and they blew the ram-horns and smashed the jars they carried.
20 And the three columns blew the ram-horns and broke the jars, and held the torches in their left hands and in their right hands the ram-horns to blow with, and cried “Charge for Jehovah and for Gideon!”
21 And they stood still where they were around the camp; and all the camp went to running and shouting to arms and taking flight,
22 and the three hundred ram-horns blew, and Jehovah set each one’s sword against the next man all through the camp; and the camp fled to Beth-hash-Shittah, toward Seredah, to the bluff of Abel-Meholah by Tabbath.
23 And the men of Israel came out in arms, out of Naphtali and out of Asher and out of all Manasseh, and pursued the Midianites.
24 And Gideon sent messengers through all the highland of Ephraim to say “Come down to head off the Midianites: seize the water against them as far as Beth-Barah, and the Jordan”; and all the men of Ephraim came out in arms and seized the water as far as Beth-Barah, and the Jordan.
25 And they took the two chiefs of the Midianites, Raven and Wolf, and killed Raven at Raven Rock and Wolf at Wolf Winepress, and followed up the Midianites; and they brought the heads of Raven and Wolf to Gideon on the other side of the Jordan,
8 and the men of Ephraim said to him “What is this thing you have done to us, not calling us when you went to attack the Midianites?” and upbraided him sharply.
2 But he said to them “What have I done now that was like you? was not Ephraim’s aftermath better than Abiezer’s crop?
3 It was into your hands that God gave the chiefs of the Midianites, Raven and Wolf; and what was I able to do that was like you?”
Then their ill humor toward him quieted down at his saying this.
4 And Gideon came to the Jordan and crossed it, he and the three hundred men that were with him, faint and pressing on the pursuit;
5 and he said to the men of Succoth “Please give some biscuits to the people at my back; for they are faint, and I am in pursuit of Zebah and Salmunnaʽ, the kings of the Midianites.”
6 And the captains of Succoth said “Are the hands of Zebah and Salmunnaʽ in your hands already, that we should give your levy bread?”
7 And Gideon said “So when Jehovah gives Zebah and Salmunnaʽ into my hands I will thresh your flesh along with wilderness thorns and thistle-heads.”
8 And he went up from there to Penuel and said the like to them, and the men of Penuel answered him as the men of Succoth had;
9 and he said to the men of Penuel too “When I come back safe I will pull down this tower.”
10 And Zebah and Salmunnaʽ were at Karkor and their camps with them, about fifteen thousand men, all that were left of the whole camp of the Eastern Beduins; and those who had fallen were a hundred and twenty thousand fighting men.
11 And Gideon went up to the Tent-Dwellers’ Road east of Nobah, and Jogbehah, and attacked the camp while it was off its guard;
12 and Zebah and Salmunnaʽ took flight, and he pursued them. And he took the two kings of the Midianites, Zebah and Salmunnaʽ, and put all the camp to rout.
13 And Gideon the son of Joash came back from battle higher than the sun,
14 and caught a young man who belonged to Succoth and questioned him, and he wrote down for him the captains and elders of Succoth, seventy-seven men;
15 and Gideon came to the men of Succoth and said “Here are Zebah and Salmunnaʽ, about whom you taunted me with the question ‘Are the hands of Zebah and Salmunnaʽ in your hands already, that we should give your fainting men bread?’” 16 and he took the elders of the city and wilderness thorns and thistle-heads and gave the men of Succoth a lesson with them.
17 And he pulled down the tower of Penuel and killed the men of the city.
18 And he said to Zebah and Salmunnaʽ “What were the men you killed at Tabor like?” and they said “Just like you; either one of them looked like a king’s son.”
19 And he said “They were my brothers, my mother’s sons; by Jehovah, if you had spared their lives I would not have killed you”;
20 and he said to his oldest son Jether “Stand up and kill them.”
But the boy did not draw his sword; for he was afraid, because he was still a boy.
21 And Zebah and Salmunnaʽ said “Stand up yourself and cut us down, because a man has a man’s might”; and Gideon stood up and killed Zebah and Salinunnaʽ and took the crescents on their camels’ necks.
22 And the men of Israel said to Gideon “Rule over us, you and your son and your son’s son, because you have saved us out of the hands of the Midianites”;
23 and Gideon said to them “I will not rule over you, neither shall my son; Jehovah shall rule over you.”
24 But Gideon said to them “I will make a request of you: give me the earrings in your booty.”
(For they had golden earrings, because they were Ishmaelites.)
25 And they said “That we will”; and he spread out his cloak and they threw in the earrings in their booty;
26 and the weight of the golden earrings that he got for his asking was nine hundred ounce of gold, besides the crescents and pendants and purple garments that were on the kings of the Midianites, and besides the necklaces on their camels’ necks.
27 And Gideon made it into an ephod and placed it in his city Ghophrah, and all Israel prostituted themselves to go after it there, and it became a snare to Gideon and his family.
28 But the Midianites were humbled before the sons of Israel, and no longer held their heads high. And the country was quiet forty years in Gideon’s days.
29 And Jerubbaal the son of Joash went to his home and lived there.
30 And Gideon had seventy sons, the issue of his body; for he had many wives.
31 And his concubine at Shekem also bore him a son, whom he named Abimelec.
32 And Gideon the son of Joash died at a good old age, and was buried in the tomb of his father Joash at Ghophrath-Abi-ha-ʽEzri.
33 And when Gideon was dead the sons of Israel went back to prostituting themselves to follow the Baals and made Baal-berith their god.
34 And the sons of Israel did not remember their God Jehovah who had delivered them out of the hands of all their enemies on all sides,
35 did not befriend the family of Jerubbaal Gideon in accordance with all the good he had done to Israel.
9:1-57
9 And Abimelec the son of Jerubbaal went to his mother’s brothers in Shekem and talked to them and to all the clan of his mother’s family, telling them
2 “Say publicly to the citizens of Shekem ‘Which is better for you, to have seventy men rule over you, the whole company of Jerubbaal’s sons, or to have one man rule over you? and remember that I am your own flesh and blood.’”
3 And his mother’s brothers said all these things to the citizens of Shekem on his behalf, and they were disposed to second Abimelec, because they said “He is our brother”;
4 and they gave him seventy shekels of silver out of the temple of Baal-berith, with which he hired a set of reckless riffraff who went behind him.
5 And he came to his father’s house at Ghophrah and killed his brothers, Jerubbaal’s sons, seventy men on one stone; but Jerubbaal’s youngest son Jotham survived, because he hid.
6 And all the citizens of Shekem and all the house of Millo came together and went and made Abimelec king by the Obelisk Oak at Shekem.
7 And people told Jotham, and he went and stood on the top of Mount Gerizzim and raised his voice and cried out to them “Listen to me, citizens of Shekem, that God may listen to you.
8 “The trees went to anoint a king over them, and said to the olive ‘Reign over us’;
9 but the olive said to them ‘Leave off my fatness, I by whom they honor gods and men, and go to sway over the trees?’
10 And the trees said to the fig ‘Come, do you reign over us’;
11 but the fig said to them ‘Leave off my sweetness and my good crops and go to sway over the trees?’
12 And the trees said to the grapevine ‘Come, do you reign over us’;
13 but the grapevine said to them ‘Leave off my juice that gladdens gods and men, and go to sway over the trees?’
14 And all the trees said to the thornbush ‘Come, do you reign over us’;
15 but the thornbush said to the trees ‘If you are anointing me king over you loyally, come take shelter in my shadow; but if not, let fire go out from the thornbush to devour the cedars of the Lebanon.’
16 “And now, if you have acted loyally and honestly in making Abimelec king, and if you have done well by Jerubbaal and his family, and if you have done to him as he deserved,
17 when my father had fought for you and taken his life in his hand and delivered you out of the hands of the Midianites,
18 and you have stood up against my father’s family today and killed his sons, seventy men on one stone, and made his slave-girl’s son Abimelec king over the citizens of Shekem because he is your brother,
19 if you have done loyally and honestly by Jerubbaal and his family this day, have joy of Abimelec and may he have joy of you too;
20 but if not, let fire go out from Abimelec to devour the citizens of Shekem and the house of Millo, and let fire go out from the citizens of Shekem and the house of Millo to devour Abimelec.”
21 And Jotham made his escape and fled away, and went to Beer and lived there for fear of his brother Abimelec.
22 And Abimelec held dominion over Israel for three years.
23 And God sent an evil spirit between Abimelec and the citizens of Shekem, and the citizens of Shekem played Abimelec false,
24 that the outrage committed upon the seventy sons of Jerubbaal might come home, and their blood to lay on their brother Abimelec who had killed them and on the citizens of Shekem who had backed him in killing his brothers.
25 And the citizens of Shekem laid him ambushes on the mountaintops and robbed everybody who passed by them on the road; and Abimelec was told of it.
26 And Goal the son of ʽObed and his brothers came and moved into Shekem, and the citizens of Shekem relied on him.
27 And they went out in the country and harvested their vineyards and trod the grapes; and they held a thanksgiving and went to the house of their god and ate and drank and cursed Abimelec,
28 and Goal the son of ʽObed said “Who is Abimelec and who is Shekem, that we are to be subject to him? why, the son of Jerubbaal and his deputy Zebul were subject to the men of Hamor the father of Shekem, and how comes it we are to be subject to him?
29 I wish I had this people in my hands, and I would put Abimelec down!” and to Abimelec he said “Raise your largest levy and come out!”
30 And Zebul the captain of the city heard the words of Goal the son of ʽObed, and was angry;
31 and he sent messengers to Abimelec at Bathram with the message “Here are Goal the son of ʽObed and his brothers coming into Shekem; and they are making the city hostile to you.
32 Now make a night start, you and the people you have with you, and lie in ambush in the field;
33 and the first thing in the morning, at sunrise, make a dash at the city. He and the people he has with him will be coming out to meet you, and you will do with him as you find opportunity.”
34 And Abimelec and all the people he had with him made a night start and lay in ambush against Shekem in four columns.
35 And Goal the son of ʽObed went out and stood at the gate of the city; and Abimelec and the people he had with him started from their place of ambush,
36 and Goal saw the people and said to Zebul “There is a body of people coming down from the mountaintops”; and Zebul said to him “The shadows of the mountains look to you like men.”
37 And Goal spoke once more, and said “There are people coming down from by the Land’s Navel, and one column is coming from toward Fortune-Tellers’ Oak.”
38 And Zebul said to him “Where on earth is that mouth of yours, the way you used to say ‘Who is Abimelec that we are to be subject to him?’
Are not these the people you did not care for? now go out and fight them!”
39 And Goal went out at the head of the citizens of Shekem and fought Abimelec;
40 and Abimelec routed him, and he fled before him, and many fell killed, up to the gate.
41 And Abimelec remained at Arumah, and Zebul ejected Goal and his brothers from quartering in Shekem.
42 And the next day the people went out to the field, and Abimelec was told of it.
43 And he took the people and divided them into three columns and lay in ambush in the field; and he saw when the people came out of the city, and started up and struck them,
44 Abimelec and the column he had with him making a dash and standing at the gate of the city, and the two columns dashing upon all who were in they field and striking them.
45 And Abimelec attacked the city all that day, and took the city, and killed the people in it, and pulled down the city and sowed it with salt.
46 And all the citizens of Shekem Tower heard of it, and went into the vault of the house of El-berith;
47 and Abimelec was told that all the citizens of Shekem Tower had gathered.
48 And Abimelec went up on Mount Salmon, he and all the people he had with him; and Abimelec took an ax in his hand and cut a bush of wood, and took it up and put it on his shoulder, and said to the people he had with him “I have done what you saw; be quick and do like me.” 49 And the people too all cut a bush each, and, following Abimelec, went and laid them against the vault and set the vault on fire over the people in it; so all the men of Shekem Tower too came to their death, about a thousand men and women.
50 And Abimelec went to Tebes, and camped at Tebes and took it.
51 And there was a strong tower in the middle of the city; and all the men and women, and all the citizens of the city, fled to that and locked themselves in, and went up on the roof of the tower.
52 And Abimelec came to the tower and attacked it, and approached the doorway of the tower to burn it.
53 But one woman threw a quern-stone on Abimelec’s head and cracked his skull;
54 and he cried in haste to his squire “Draw your sword and give me my death-stroke, that it may not be said of me ‘a woman killed him’”; and his man ran him through, so that he died.
55 And the men of Israel saw that Abimelec was dead, and went home to their places.
56 So God sent back Abimelec’s mischief that he had done to his father in killing his seventy brothers,
57 and the mischief of the men of Shekem God sent back on their own heads, and the curse of Jotham the son of Jerubbaal came upon them.
10 And after Abimelec there stood up to save Israel Tolaʽ the son of Puah the son of Dodo the Issacarite; he lived at Shamir in the highland of Ephraim;
2 and he judged Israel twenty-three years, and died and was buried at Shamir.
3 And after him Jair the Gileadite stood up, and judged Israel twenty-two years;
4 he had thirty sons who rode on thirty young donkeys, and they had thirty cities (these they call the Havvoth of Jair to this day) in the country of Gilead.
5 And Jair died, and was buried at Kamon.
6 And the sons of Israel did more of what displeased Jehovah, and worshiped the Baals and the ʽAshtarts and the gods of Syria and the gods of Phenicia and the gods of Moab and the gods of the Bene-ʽAmmon and the gods of the Philistines, and left Jehovah and did not worship him.
7 And Jehovah was angry with Israel and sold them into the hands of the Philistines and into the hands of the Bene-ʽAmmon,
8 and they mauled and persecuted the sons of Israel that year eighteen years, all the sons of Israel on the other side of the Jordan, in the Amorite country in Gilead.
9 And the Bene-ʽAmmon crossed the Jordan to attack even Judah and Benjamin and the highland of Ephraim; and Israel was in great straits.
10 And the sons of Israel cried to Jehovah “We have sinned against you, because we have left our God and worshiped the Baals”;
11 and Jehovah said to the sons of Israel “Is not from the Egyptians and the Amorites from the Bene-ʽAmmon and the Philistines?
12 and the Phenicians and ʽAmalek and Maʽon oppressed you, and you cried out to me and I saved you out of their hands;
13 but you left me and worshiped other gods; so I will not save you anymore.
14 Go and cry to the gods you have chosen: let them save you in your time of distress.”
15 But the sons of Israel said to Jehovah “We have sinned; do with us yourself just as you think best, only deliver us this day,”
16 and removed the foreign gods out of their midst and worshiped Jehovah; and he could not bear Israel’s suffering.
17 And the Bene-ʽAmmon came out in arms and camped at Gilead; and the sons of Israel came together and camped at Mispah.
18 And the people, the captains of Gilead, said to each other “Who will be the man that has the nerve to fight the Bene-ʽAmmon? he shall be head of all the population of Gilead.”
11 And Jephthah the Gileadite was a stalwart man who was the son of a prostitute.
Gilead had begotten Jephthah,
2 and Gilead’s wife bore sons to him, and the wife’s sons, when they grew up, turned Jephthah out and said to him “You shall not inherit in our family, because you are the son of another woman.” 3 And Jephthah left the country on account of his brothers, and lived in the Tob country; and a set of riffraff drew together to Jephthah and went on expeditions with him
4 And after a while the Bene-ʽAmmon made war on Israel;
5 and when the Bene-ʽAmmon made war on Israel the elders of Gilead went to fetch Jephthah out of the Tob country.
6 And they said to Jephthah “Come and be our chieftain to make war with the Bene-ʽAmmon.”
7 And Jephthah said to the elders of Gilead “Why, you hated me and turned me out of my family; how is it you have come to me now when you are in a tight place?”
8 And the elders of Gilead said to Jephthah “As for that, we have come back to you now, and you are to come with us and fight the Bene-ʽAmmon, and we will have you for head of all the population of Gilead.”
9 And Jephthah said to the elders of Gilead “If you bring me back to fight the Bene-ʽAmmon, and Jehovah gives them to be defeated before me, I shall be your head?”
10 And the elders of Gilead said to Jephthah “So help us Jehovah, we will do as you have said.”
11 And Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead, and the people set him over them as head and chieftain; and Jephthah set forth the terms of the pledge before Jehovah at Mispah.
12 And Jephthah sent envoys to the king of the Bene-ʽAmmon to say “What business have you coming into my country to attack me?”
13 And the king of the Bene-ʽAmmon said to Jephthah’s envoys Because Israel took my country when they came up out of Egypt, from the Arnon to the Jabbok and the Jordan; now restore it peaceably.”
14 And Jephthah again sent envoys to the king of the Bene-’Ammon
15 and said to him “Says Jephthah, Israel did not take the country of Moab nor that of the Bene-ʽAmmon,
16 but when they were coming up out of Egypt Israel went in the wilderness as far as the Red Sea, and came to Kadesh;
17 and Israel sent envoys to the king of Edom to say ‘Let us pass through your country,’ and the king of Edom did not listen to them; and they sent also to the king of Moab, and he was not willing; so Israel stayed at Kadesh.
18 And they went in the wilderness around the country of Edom and that of Moab, and came along east of the country of Moab and camped beyond the Arnon, and did not come within the boundary of Moab, because the Arnon is the boundary of Moab.
19 And Israel sent envoys to Sihon the king of the Amorites, the king of Heshbon, and said to him ‘Let us pass through your country to our destination’;
20 but Sihon refused to give Israel passage within his boundary, and Sihon brought together all his people and camped at Jahzah, and fought with Israel.
21 And Israel’s God Jehovah gave Sihon and all his people into Israel’s hands, and they defeated them; and Israel took possession of all the country of the Amorites who inhabited that country;
22 and they succeeded to all the territory of the Amorites, from the Arnon to the Jabbok and from the wilderness to the Jordan.
23 Now, when Israel’s God Jehovah dispossessed the Amorites before his people Israel, are you to succeed to them?
24 You succeed to what your god Kemosh gives you possession of, do you not? and whomever our God Jehovah dispossesses before us, we succeed to them.
25 “And then, are you any better than Balak the son of Sippor, king of Moab? did he bring any claim against Israel, or wage any war with them?
26 When Israel settled in Heshbon and its dependencies, and in ʽAroʽer and its dependencies, and in all the cities along the banks of the Arnon, for three hundred years, how is it you did not recover them at that time?
27 And I have committed no offense against you, but you are doing wrong by me in making war on me.
Jehovah the Judge give judgment today between the sons of Israel and the Bene-ʽAmmon.”
28 But the king of the Bene-ʽAmmon did not listen to the words Jephthah sent to him.
29 And the spirit of Jehovah came upon Jephthah, and he passed through Gilead and Manasseh, and through Mispeh-Gilead; and from Mispeh-Gilead he passed over to the Bene-ʽAmmon.
30 And Jephthah made a vow to Jehovah, “If you give the Bene-ʽAmmon into my hands,
31 then any that comes out of my house doors to meet me, when I come safe back from the Bene-ʽAmmon, shall belong to Jehovah, and I will offer that one as a burnt-offering.”
32 And Jephthah passed over to the Bene-ʽAmmon to fight them, and Jehovah gave them into his hands;
33 and he made havoc of them from ʽAroʽer till you come to Minnith, twenty cities, and to Abel-keramim, great havoc.
And the Bene-ʽAmmon were humbled before the sons of Israel.
34 And Jephthah came to his home at Mispah, and found his daughter coming out to meet him with tambourines and dances; and she was his one only child, he had no son or daughter else.
35 And at seeing her he tore his clothes and said “O, O, my daughter, you have laid me low; you are down on me with the rest! and I have opened my mouth to Jehovah and cannot go back!”
36 And she said to him “Father, you have opened your mouth to Jehovah: do with me as went out of your mouth, so long as Jehovah has done vengeance on your enemies the Bene-ʽAmmon for you.”
37 But she said to her father “Let this thing be done for me: let me be for two months to go and range on the mountains and weep for my maidenhood, I and my girl friends.”
38 And he said “Go,” and sent her off for two months; and she went, she and her girl friends, and wept for her maidenhood on the mountains.
39 And at the end of two months she came back to her father, and he did with her what he had made the vow to do, when she had not known man.
40 And it became a usage in Israel that year by year the Israelite girls should go to celebrate the memory of the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite, four days in a year.
12:1-15
12 And the men of Ephraim came out in arms and crossed to Saphon, and said to Jephthah “How is it you have gone over to fight the Bene-’Ammon and not called us to go with you? we will burn your house down over your head.”
2 And Jephthah said to them “I had a quarrel on hand, I and my people, and the Bene-ʽAmmon had committed outrages on me; and I called you to arms and you did not help me against them;
3 so I saw there was nobody to help me, and I took my life in my hand and passed over to the Bene-ʽAmmon, and Jehovah gave them into my hands; then why have you come up to my home this day to fight me?”
4 And Jephthah gathered all the men of Gilead and fought the Ephraimites, and the men of Gilead defeated the Ephraimites.
5 And the Gileadites seized the fords of the Jordan against the Ephraimites; and when an Ephraimite fugitive said “Let me cross” and the men of Gilead said to him “Are you an Ephraimite?” and he said “No,”
6 they would say to him “Say shibboleth,” and he would say sibboleth, not getting the pronunciation right, and they would take hold of him and cut his throat, letting the blood run into the fords of the Jordan.
And at that time forty-two thousand of the Ephraimites fell.
7 And Jephthah judged Israel six years; and Jephthah the Gileadite died, and was buried in his city in Gilead.
8 And after him Ibsan from Beth-lehem judged Israel;
9 he had thirty sons, and married off thirty daughters and took in thirty girls from outside as wives for his sons; and he judged Israel seven years.
10 And Ibsan died, and was buried at Beth-lehem.
11 And after him Elon the Zebulonite judged Israel; and he judged Israel ten years.
12 And Elon the Zebulonite died, and was buried at Elon in the Zebulonite country.
13 And after him ʽAbdon the son of Hillel the Pireathonite judged Israel;
14 he had forty sons and thirty grandsons, who rode on seventy young donkeys; and he judged Israel eight years.
15 And ʽAbdon the son of Hillel the Pireathonite died, and was buried at Pireathon in the Ephraimite country, in the ʽAmalekite highland.
13 And the sons of Israel did more of what displeased Jehovah, and Jehovah gave them into the hands of the Philistines for forty years.
2 Now there was a certain man of Soreah, of the Danite clan, named Manoah; and his wife was barren and had never had a child.
3 And the Angel of Jehovah appeared to the wife and said to her “You are barren, have never had a child; you shall conceive and have a son.
4 Now take care not to drink wine or beer, nor to eat anything unclean;
5 for you are conceiving and are to have a son, over whose head no razor shall go, because he shall be God’s devotee from his birth; and he shall begin saving Israel from the Philistines.”
6 And the woman went in and told her husband “The man of God came to me, looking like the Angel of God, very awful; and I did not ask him where he was from, and he did not tell me his name; and he said to me
7 ‘You are conceiving and are to have a son; now do not drink wine nor beer, nor eat any uncleanness, because the boy shall be God’s devotee from his birth till the day of his death.’”
8 And Manoah invoked Jehovah, and said “O Lord, let the man of God whom you sent come to us again and instruct us what to do with the boy that is to be born.”
9 And God obeyed Manoah, and the Angel of God came to the woman again while she was sitting out on the range and her husband Manoah was not with her;
10 and the woman ran in haste and told her husband “The man that came to me that day has appeared to me.”
11 And Manoah rose and went after his wife, and came to the man and said to him “Are you the man that spoke to the woman?” and he said “Yes.”
12 And Manoah said “At the time your words come true, what shall be the rule for the boy and what shall he do?”
13 And the Angel of Jehovah said to Manoah “The woman must take care about everything that I told her:
14 she must not eat anything that comes from the grapevine, nor drink wine or beer, nor eat any uncleanness: she must observe all the instructions I gave her.”
15 And Manoah said to the Angel of Jehovah “Let us have you stop a while, and let us do a kid for you”;
16 but the Angel of Jehovah said to Manoah “If you have me stop I will not eat bread of yours, and if you do an animal you must offer it as a burnt-offering to Jehovah.”
(For Manoah did not know that it was the Angel of Jehovah.)
17 And Manoah said to the Angel of Jehovah “What is your name? when your words come true we will pay you honor.”
18 But the Angel of Jehovah said to him “What do you ask my name for, when it is mysterious?”
19 And Manoah took the kid and the grain-offering and burned them on the stone as an offering to Jehovah Who Works Mysteriously;
20 and as the flame went up off the altar to the sky, the Angel of Jehovah went up in the altar-flame, while Manoah and his wife looked on; and they threw themselves flat on their faces;
21 and the Angel of Jehovah never again appeared to Manoah and his wife.
Then Manoah knew that it was the Angel of Jehovah.
22 And Manoah said to his wife “We must die, because we have seen God”;
23 but his wife said to him “If Jehovah chose to cause our death he would not have taken a burnt-offering and grain-offering at our hands, nor showed us these sights, not to say let us hear such a thing as this.”
24 And the woman had a son and named him Samson; and Jehovah blessed the boy as he grew up.
25 And the spirit of Jehovah began to stir him at Dan’s Camp, between Soreah and Eshtaol.
14 And Samson went down to Timnath; and at Timnath he saw a woman of a Philistine family,
2 and he came up and told his father and mother “At Timnath I saw a woman of a Philistine family; now get her for my wife.”
3 And his father and mother said to him “Is there no such thing as a woman in your own family and in all your people, that you are going and getting a wife from the uncircumcised Philistines?”
But Samson said to his father “Get me her, because she suits me”;
4 and his father and mother did not know that it was from Jehovah, because he was aiming to start a quarrel against the Philistines. (At that time the Philistines had the rule over Israel.)
5 And Samson and his father and mother went down to Timnath, and came to the Timnath vineyards, and he found a two-year-old lion that met him with a roar;
6 and the spirit of Jehovah seized upon Samson, and he twisted its legs out of joint as one would with a kid, not having anything in his hand; but he did not tell his father and mother what he had done.
7 And Samson came down and had a talk with the woman, and she suited him.
8 And after some days he came back to take her; and he turned off to see the remains of the lion, and found a swarm of bees in the lion’s body, and honey.
9 And he poked it out into his hands and ate it as he went along, and went to his father and mother and gave them some which they ate, but he did not tell them that it was out of the lion’s body he had gathered the honey.
10 And his father went down to the woman, and Samson made a wassail (for that was the way the young men used to do);
11 and when they saw him they took thirty as comrades, and these were with him.
12 And Samson said to them “Let me put a riddle to you: if you tell, me the answer in the seven days of the wassail I will give you thirty linen undercloths and thirty dress cloaks,
13 but if you cannot tell me you shall give me thirty linen undercloths and thirty dress cloaks.”
And they said to him “Put your riddle and let us hear it”;
14 and he said to them “Out of the eater came food, and out of mighty came sweet.”
And they could not answer the riddle in three days;
15 and on the seventh day they said to Samson’s wife “Inveigle your husband into telling us the answer, if you do not want us to burn you and your family; did you invite us here to beggar us?”
16 And Samson’s wife sobbed at him and said “You just hate me, you do not love me: you have put the riddle to my fellow-countrymen and not told me the answer.”
And he said to her “I have not told my father and mother, and am I to tell you?”
17 but she sobbed at him for the seven days that they held the wassail, and on the seventh day he told her because she nagged him so, and she told her fellow-countrymen;
18 and the men of the city said to him on the seventh day before he had gone into the chamber “What is sweeter than honey? and what is mightier than a lion?”
And he said to them “If you had not plowed with my heifer you would not have found out my riddle.”
19 (And the spirit of Jehovah seized upon him, and he went down to Ashkelon and killed thirty of the men there and took their spoils and gave the cloaks to those who had told the answer of the riddle.)
And he was angry and went up to his father’s home.
20 And Samson’s wife became the wife of his comrade who had been best man to him.
15:1-20
15 And after a while, during the wheat harvest, Samson visited his wife with a kid, and said “I will go into the chamber to my wife”; but her father would not let him go in,
2 but said “I declare I thought you positively hated her, and I gave her to your comrade; her younger sister is better anyhow have her instead.”
3 And Samson said to them “This time the Philistines have nothing to complain of if I do them a mischief”;
4 and Samson went and caught three hundred foxes, and took torches, and turned the foxes tail to tail and put a torch in the middle between every two tails,
5 and lighted the torches and turned them loose into the Philistines’ standing crops, and burned stack and standing crop and vineyard and olive-tree.
6 And the Philistines said “Who did that?” and they said “It was Samson, that is son-in-law to the Timnathite, because he took his wife and gave her to his comrade”; and the Philistines came up and burned her and her family.
7 And Samson said to them “O, but if you do things like that I will be revenged on you, and afterward I will let it drop”;
8 and he smote them hip and thigh a great slaughter, and went down and lived in the cleft of ʽEtam Cliff.
9 And the Philistines came up and camped in Judah and forayed at the Jawbone;
10 and the men of Judah said “Why have you come up against us?” and they said “We have come to tie up Samson, to do to him as he did to us.”
11 And three thousand men of Judah went down to the cleft of ʽEtam Cliff and said to Samson “Do you not know that the Philistines have the rule over us? what is this you have done to us?”
And he said to them “As they did to me, so I did to them.”
12 And they said to him “We have come to tie you up, to give you into the hands of the Philistines.”
And Samson said to them “Swear to me that you will not cut me down yourselves”;
13 and they said to him “No, but tie you up and give you into their hands; we will not kill you.”
And they tied him up with two new ropes and brought him up from the Cliff.
14 He had come to Jawbone, and the Philistines had come cheering to meet him, when the spirit of Jehovah seized upon him and the ropes on his arms became like burned-up flax, and his fastenings melted off from his wrists;
15 and he found a fresh jawbone of a donkey, and reached for it and got it and killed a thousand men with it.
16 And Samson said “With a beast’s jawbone I have been their bane! with a beast’s jawbone killed a thousand men!”
17 And when he had said it he dropped the jawbone from his hand; and they call the place Jawbone Fell.
18 And he was very thirsty, and called to Jehovah “You have given this great victory into your servant’s hands, and now I shall die with thirst and fall into the hands of the uncircumcised”;
19 and God ripped open the hollow in the Jawbone, and water came out, and he took a drink, and his spirit came back and he revived.
For this reason it is named Caller Spring, the one that is in the Jawbone to this day.
20 And he judged Israel, in the days of the Philistines, twenty years.
16 And Samson went from there to Ghaza, and saw a prostitute there and went in to her;
2 and the Ghazites were told “Samson has come here,” and they came around and lay in ambush for him all night at the city gate, and kept quiet all night, saying “Till morning daylight, and we will kill him!”
3 But Samson lay abed till midnight, and got up at midnight and took hold of the city gates and the two gateposts and pulled them up bar and all, and put them on his shoulders and took them up to the top of the mountain facing Hebron on the east.
4 And after that he fell in love with a woman in Sorek Arroyo, whose name was Delilah.
5 And the Sarns of the Philistines came up to her and said to her “Inveigle him and see by what means he has the great strength, and by what means we may master him and tie him so as to tame him, and we will each give you eleven hundred shekels of silver.”
6 And Delilah said to Samson “Tell me by what means you have the great strength, and by what means you might be tied up so as to tame you.”
7 And Samson said to her “If they tie me up with seven fresh undried bowstrings I shall weaken and be like any man.”
8 And the Sarns of the Philistines brought up to her seven fresh undried bowstrings, and she tied him with them,
9 while she had the ambuscade waiting in the chamber; and she said to him “The Philistines are on you, Samson!” and he broke the bowstrings as a strand of tow breaks when it scents fire, and his strength was not found out.
10 And Delilah said to Samson “Here you have been trifling with me and telling me lies; now tell me by what means you might be tied up.”
11 And he said to her “If they tie me with new ropes that have never been used, I shall weaken and be like any man.”
12 And Delilah took new ropes and tied him with them, and said to him “The Philistines are on you, Samson!” while the ambuscade was waiting in the chamber; and he broke them off his arms like a thread.
13 And Delilah said to Samson “You have kept on trifling with me and telling me lies; tell me by what means you might be tied up.”
And he said to her “If you weave the seven braids of hair on my head in with your cloth and drive them down with the stick, I shall weaken and be like any man.”
14 And she put him to sleep and wove the seven braids of hair on his head in with her cloth and drove them down with the stick, and said to him “The Philistines are on you, Samson!” and he woke from his sleep and pulled up the stick, the loom and the cloth; and his strength was not found out.
15 And she said to him “How is it you say ‘I love you’ and do not take me into your confidence? this is three times you have trifled with me and not told me by what means you have the great strength”;
16 and when she nagged him with her talk every day and kept the screws on him, he was ready to die with impatience,
17 and he made a clean breast of it and said to her “No razor has gone over my head, because I have been God’s devotee from my birth; if I am shaved my strength will leave me, and I shall weaken and become like everybody.”
18 And Delilah saw that he had made a clean breast of it, and she sent for the Sarns of the Philistines, saying “This time come up; he has made a clean breast of it”; and the Sarns of the Philistines came up to her, and brought the money up with them.
19 And she put him to sleep in her embrace, and called the man, and shaved off the seven braids of hair on his head, and he began to grow tame, and his strength left him.
20 And she said “The Philistines are on you, Samson!” and he woke up from his sleep and thought “I shall come off as I did the other times, I shall shake myself loose,” not knowing that his strength had left him.
21 And the Philistines took hold of him and put out his eyes, and brought him down to Ghaza and put him in irons, and he became a grinder in the prison.
22 But the hair on his head began to grow as soon as it had been shaved.
23 And the Sarns of the Philistines came together to offer a great sacrifice to their god Dagon and to hold festival, and thought “Our god has given our enemy Samson into our hands”; 24 and the people saw him and praised their god, because, they said, “Our god has given our enemy into our hands, him who made many our dead and laid waste our lands.”
25 And when they were jolly they said “Call Samson to give us an exhibition.”
And they summoned Samson out of the prison, and he gave an entertainment before them; and they had him stand between the pillars.
26 And Samson said to the young man who held him by the hand “Put me so that I can feel for the pillars the house is supported on and find them, to lean on them,”
27 the house being full of the men and women (and all the Sarns of the Philistine being there, and on the roof about three thousand men and women) who were looking on while Samson gave his exhibition.
28 And Samson called to Jehovah “Lord Jehovah, remember me and strengthen me just this once, God, so that I may take my revenge on the Philistines for one of my two eyes”;
29 and Samson twisted the two middle pillars that the house was supported on, and braced himself against them one with his right hand and one with his left.
30 And Samson said “Die myself with the Philistines!” and gave a hard lunge, and down fell the house on the Sarns and on all the people in it.
And there were more dead that he had killed at his death than that he had killed in his life.
31 And his brothers and all his family went down and brought him away, and buried him up between Soreah and Eshtaol in the grave of his father Manoah.
And he had judged Israel twenty years.
17:1-13
17 Now there was a man of the highland of Ephraim, named Micah:
2 and he said to his mother “The eleven hundred shekels of silver that were taken from you, and you pronounced a curse and said things in my hearing the silver is with me: it was I that took it.”
And his mother said “Jehovah bless my son!”
3 And he returned the eleven hundred shekels of silver to his mother; and his mother said “I hereby dedicate the silver to Jehovah, from my hands exclusively, to make a statue; and now I will return it to you.”
4 And he returned the silver to his mother; and his mother took two hundred shekels of silver and gave it to a silversmith, and he made it into a statue, which was at Micah’s home.
5 And the man Micah had a chapel, and made an ephod and teraphim, and installed one of his sons, who became priest to him.
6 In those days there was no king in Israel: each did what suited him.
7 And there was a youth from Bethlehem in Judah, of the clan of Judah, who was a Levite, and he was living there as an immigrant;
8 and the man went from the city, from Bethlehem in Judah, to settle as an immigrant wherever he found an opening.
And he came to the highland of Ephraim, to Micah’s home, on his errand;
9 and Micah said to him “Where do you come from?” and he said to him “I am a Levite from Bethlehem in Judah, and I am out to settle as an immigrant wherever I find an opening.”
10 And Micah said to him “Stay with me and be father and priest to me, and I will give you ten shekels of silver a year and a suit of clothes and your board”; and the Levite went.
11 And the Levite consented to stay with the man; and the youth became like one of his sons to him.
12 And Micah installed the Levite, and the youth became priest to him, and was in Micah’s house.
13 And Micah said “Now I know that Jehovah will do well by me, since I have got the Levite for priest.”
18:1-31
18 In those days there was no king in Israel.
And in those days the Danite tribe was looking for a domain to live in, because till that day nothing had fallen to them as a domain among the tribes of Israel;
2 and the children of Dan sent out of their clan five men of all classes, stalwart men from Soreah and Eshtaol, to spy around the country and to examine it, and said to them “Go examine the country”; and they came to Micah’s home in the highland of Ephraim and spent the night there.
3 They had come opposite Micah’s house when they recognized the Levite youth’s voice and turned in there, and said to him “Who brought you here? what are you doing in these parts? what are you here for?”
4 And he said to them “Micah has done such things for me, and he has hired me to be priest to him.”
5 And they said to him “Put the question to God to let us know whether our errand that we are going on will be successful.”
6 And the priest said to them “Go, and good betide you; your errand that you are on is under Jehovah’s eye.”
7 And the five men went on, and came to Laish, and saw the people in it, living off its guard in Phenician fashion, at rest and off their guard, with no one in the country to balk anything, no holder of sway, and they far away from the Phenicians and having no relations with Syria.
8 And they came to their brothers at Soreah and Eshtaol, and their brothers said to them “What is your word?”
9 and they said “Come on, let us go up against them; for we have seen the city and found it very good; and you are lying still! do not be slack about going to enter and take possession of the country.
10 When you come you will come to a people off their guard, plenty of elbowroom in their country, because God has given it into your hands: a place where there is no lack of anything the country produces.”
11 And six hundred men of the Danite clan from Soreah and Eshtaol set out from there in fighting outfit,
12 and went up and camped at Kirjath-Jeʽarim in Judah: that place has consequently been called Dan’s Camp to this day; it lies west of Kirjath-Jeʽarim.
13 And from there they crossed over to the highland of Ephraim, and came to Micah’s home;
14 and the five men who had gone to spy around the country (Laish) spoke up and said to their brothers “Do you know that in these houses there is an ephod and teraphim and a statue? now make up your minds what you will do.”
15 And they turned in there and went into the Levite youth’s house, Micah’s home, and asked him how he did;
16 and while six hundred men in fighting outfit stood at the gate of the place, who belonged to the sons of Dan,
17 up went the five men who had gone to spy around the country, went in there, took the statue and the ephod and the teraphim, the priest standing at the gate of the place, and the six hundred men in fighting outfit:
18 those went into Micah’s home and took the statue, the ephod, and the teraphim.
And the priest said to them “What are you doing?”
19 and they said to him “Be still, put your hand over your mouth and go with us and be father and priest to us: is it better for you to be priest to one man’s house or for you to be priest to a tribe and clan in Israel?”
20 And the priest was in high glee, and he took the ephod and the teraphim and the statue and went into the midst of the people.
21 And they turned and went, putting the women and children and the stock and the goods in front.
22 They had got to some distance from Micah’s home when the men in the houses near Micah’s came out in arms and overtook the sons of Dan,
23 and they called out to the sons of Dan and they faced about and said to Micah “What is the matter, that you have come out in arms?”
24 And he said “You have taken my gods that I made, and the priest, and gone off with them; what more have I? what do you mean by saying to me ‘What is the matter?’”
25 And the sons of Dan said to him “Do not let your voice be heard around us, for fear some fellows with bad tempers should get after you, and you should make away with your life and the lives of your family”;
26 and the sons of Dan went on their way. And Micah saw that they were too strong for him, and he turned and went back home,
27 while they took that Micah had made and the priest that he had had and came on Laish, on a people at rest and off their guard, and massacred them and burned down the city;
28 and there was no rescuer because they were far away from Sidon and had no relations with Syria, though it was in the vale that belongs to Beth-Rehob.
29 And they rebuilt the city and lived in it, and named the city Dan after Dan their ancestor; but Laish was the name of the city originally.
30 And the sons of Dan set the statue up for themselves, and Jonathan the son of Gershom the son of Moses, he and his descendants, were priests to the Danite tribe till the day of the deportation of the country.
31 And they put up for themselves Micah’s statue that he had made, all the time the house of God was at Shiloh.
19:1-30
19 And in those days, there being no king in Israel, there was a certain Levite living as an immigrant far back in the highlands of Ephraim, and he took as his concubine a woman from Bethlehem in Judah.
2 And his concubine got into a rage at him, and went from him to her father’s home at Bethlehem in Judah and was there a while, four months.
3 And her husband set out after her to coax her back, taking with him his man and a pair of donkeys; and he came to her father’s home, and the girl’s father saw him and came joyfully to meet him.
4 And his father-in-law, the girl’s father, held him fast, and he stayed with him three days; and they ate and drank and lodged there for the night.
5 And on the fourth day, the first thing in the morning, he rose to go, but the girl’s father said to his son-in-law “Take a bit of bread to brace you up, and after that you shall go.”
6 And the two of them sat down and ate together and drank, and the girl’s father said to the husband “Do stay for the night and be jolly”;
7 and the husband rose to go, but his father-in-law urged him to stay, and he spent the night there again.
8 And the first thing in the morning on the fifth day he was going, but the girl’s father said “Have something to brace you up” and inveigled him till along in the afternoon, and the two of them were eating.
9 And the husband rose to go, he and his concubine and his man, but his father-in-law, the girl’s father, said to him “Here the day is dropping off to evening: stay for the night; here it is the windup of the day: stay here for the night and be jolly, and tomorrow be on your way the first thing in the morning, and go to your home.”
10 But the husband would not stay for the night, but started out, and came opposite Jebus (that is, Jerusalem), having with him a pair of saddled donkeys, and his concubine with him.
11 They were up to Jebus when the day got very low, and the serving-man said to his master “Come, let us turn off to this city of the Jebusites’ and lodge there for the night”;
12 but his master said to him “We will not turn off to a city of foreigners who do not belong to the sons of Israel, but go across to Gibeah.”
13 And he said to his man “Come, we will get to one of the places and stay at Gibeah or Ramah for the night”;
14 and they crossed over and went on, and the sun went down on them alongside Gibeah of Benjamin,
15 and they turned off there to go in and lodge in Gibeah.
And he went in and sat down in the square of the city, but there was no man to take them in into his house for the night.
16 But in came an old man, coming at evening from his work in the field (the man was from the highland of Ephraim and was living in Gibeah as an immigrant, while the men of the place were Benjamites),
17 and he raised his eyes and saw the wayfarer in the square of the city. And the old man said “Where are you going, and where do you come from?”
18 and he said to him “We are going across from Bethlehem in Judah to the back side of the highland of Ephraim: I am from there, and I have been to Bethlehem in Judah, and I am going home.
But there is no man to take us in into his house.
19 Yet I have with me both straw and feed for the donkeys, and bread and wine too for both your servants, and for the man: we are not in want of anything.”
20 And the old man said “All right: just let every want of yours come on me; only do not spend the night in the square,”
21 and brought him into his house, and foddered the donkeys.
22 And they washed their feet and ate and drank. They were having a jolly evening when the men of the city, a set of reprobates, got around the house pounding on the door, and told the old man, the master of the house, “Bring out the man that went into your house, for us to know him.”
23 And the man went out to them, the master of the house, and said to them “Don’t, brothers, don’t do mischief; now that this man has come into my house, don’t do this scandalous thing.
24 Here is my maiden daughter, and his concubine: let me bring them out to you, and outrage them and do what you think best to them, but don’t do this scandalous thing to this man.”
25 But the men would not listen to him; and the husband took hold of his concubine and took her outside to them, and they knew her and did their will on her all night till morning, and let her go at dawn.
26 And the woman came when morning was drawing on, and fell down at the door of the man’s house and lay there till daylight.
27 And her master rose in the morning and opened the doors of the house and went out to go on his way, and found the woman, his concubine, lying at the door of the house with her hands on the threshold.
28 And he said to her “Get up and let us go,” but nobody answered; and he took her on his donkey.
29 And the husband went off to his place; and he went into his house and took the knife, and took hold of his concubine and cut her up joint by joint into twelve pieces, and sent her all through the territory of Israel,
30 and gave the men that he sent the order “You are to say to all the men of Israel ‘Has there happened the like of this thing from the day that the sons of Israel came up out of Egypt to this day? make up your minds to something, and speak’”; and everyone who saw said “There has not happened, nor was ever seen, the like of this, from the day that the sons of Israel came up out of Egypt to this day.”
20:1-48
20 And all the sons of Israel came out to Jehovah at Mispah, and the congregation assembled there like one man, from Dan to Beer-Shebaʽ and the country of Gilead;
2 and the headmen of all the people, all the tribes of Israel, took their stand as assembly of the people of God, four hundred thousand fighting men of foot.
3 And the sons of Benjamin heard that the sons of Israel had gone up to Mispah.
And the sons of Israel said “Tell us how this crime happened.”
4 And the Levite, the murdered woman’s husband, answered “At Gibeah of Benjamin I and my concubine went in to lodge for the night,
5 and the citizens of Gibeah mobbed me, surrounding the house I was in at night; they thought of killing me, and they outraged my concubine so that she died of it;
6 and I took my concubine and cut her up and sent her all through the countryside of Israel’s domain, because they had committed a scandal in Israel.
7 Here you all are, sons of Israel; speak your minds here.”
8 And all the people rose like one man, saying “We will not go to our homes, nor each drop off to his house,
9 but this is the thing we will do to Gibeah now: go up against it by lot,
10 and take ten men to the hundred of all the tribes of Israel, and a hundred to the thousand and a thousand to the myriad, to get provisions for the people, to do to the inmates of Gibeah of Benjamin what all the scandal they have committed in Israel deserves.”
11 And all the men of Israel came together to the city, acting in concert like one man.
12 And the tribes of Israel sent men through all the tribe of Benjamin to say “What a crime this is that has happened among you!
13 now give up the reprobate men at Gibeah for us to put to death and rout out crime from Israel.”
But the sons of Benjamin would not obey their brothers the sons of Israel;
14 and the sons of Benjamin came together from their cities to Gibeah to go to war with the sons of Israel.
15 And the sons of Benjamin were mustered on that day, from the cities twenty-six thousand fighting men, apart from the inhabitants of Gibeah they were mustered seven hundred picked men.
16 Out of all that body there were seven hundred picked men that were left-handed.
All these would sling a stone at a hair and never miss.
17 And the men of Israel were mustered, apart from Benjamin, four hundred thousand fighting men; all these were men of war.
18 And they went up to Bethel.
And the sons of Israel put the question to God “Whom shall we have go up to war with the sons of Benjamin to begin with?” and Jehovah said “Judah to begin with.”
19 And the sons of Israel started out in the morning and beleaguered Gibeah.
20 And the men of Israel went out to fight the Benjamites; and the men of Israel gave them battle toward Gibeah;
21 and the sons of Benjamin came out of Gibeah and mowed off among the Israelites that day twenty-two thousand men.
22 And the people, the men of Israel, took heart and gave battle once more in the same place where they did on the first day.
23 And the sons of Israel went up to Bethel and wept before Jehovah till evening, and put the question to Jehovah “Shall I engage in battle with my brother Benjamin’s sons anymore?” and Jehovah said “Go up against him.”
24 And the sons of Israel engaged the Benjamites on the second day;
25 and the Benjamites came out of Gibeah to meet them on the second day, and mowed off among the sons of Israel eighteen thousand more; all these were fighting men.
26 And all the sons of Israel, and all the people, went up and came to Bethel, and wept and sat there before Jehovah and fasted that day till evening, and offered burnt-offerings and welfare-sacrifices before Jehovah;
27 and the sons of Israel put the question to Jehovah (the ark of God’s covenant was there in those days,
28 and Pinehas the son of Eleazar the son of Aaron was in charge of its service in those days) “Shall I again go out to battle with my brother Benjamin’s sons, or shall I leave off?” and Jehovah said “Go up, for tomorrow I will give them into your hands.”
29 And the Israelites laid ambuscades against Gibeah on all sides.
30 And the sons of Israel went up against the sons of Benjamin on the third day and offered battle as before;
31 and the sons of Benjamin came out to meet the people, broke away from the city, and began to stab some of the people as before on the highways that go up one to Bethel and one to Gibeon, in the open, about thirty men among the Israelites.
32 And the sons of Benjamin thought “They are beaten, the same as the first time”; but the sons of Israel thought “Let us run and break them away from the city into the highways.”
33 And all the men of Israel started up from their place, and formed their line at Baal-Tamar, and the Israelites’ ambuscade burst out from its place to the west of Gebaʽ,
34 and ten thousand picked men out of all Israel went in in front of Gibeah; and the fighting was heavy.
But they did not know that disaster was upon them.
35 And Jehovah caused Israel to beat Benjamin; and the sons of Israel mowed down twenty-five thousand one hundred among the Benjamites that day; all these were fighting men.
36 And the sons of Benjamin saw that they were beaten.And the men of Israel gave way to the Benjamites, because they relied on the ambuscade they had laid against Gibeah;
37 and the ambuscade made a hasty dash to Gibeah.
And the ambuscade poured in and massacred the whole city.
38 And the appointment the men of Israel had with the ambuscade was that they should send up a smoke-signal from the city;
39 and the men of Israel turned in the battle, and the Benjamites began to stab about thirty men among the men of Israel, because they thought “It must be they are beaten, the same as in the first battle.”
40 But the signal began to go up from the city, a pillar of smoke; and the Benjamites turned their eyes back, and found that the holocaust of the city had towered to the sky;
41 and the men of Israel had turned; and the men of Benjamin were in consternation because they saw that disaster was upon them.
42 And they turned before the men of Israel toward the wilderness; but the fighting kept up with them, and those who came out of the cities mowed them down in the midst.
43 And they grated away the Benjamites from Nohah to opposite Gebaʽ on the east;
44 and eighteen thousand men of Benjamin fell, stalwart men all these.
45 And they turned and fled to Rimmon Cliff in the wilderness, and they took an aftermath of five thousand men; and they kept up behind them to Gideom and killed two thousand of them.
46 The total of the Benjamites that fell was twenty-five thousand men on that day, stalwart men all these;
47 but six hundred men turned and fled to Rimmon Cliff in the wilderness and stayed on Rimmon Cliff four months.
48 And the men of Israel went back to the sons of Benjamin and massacred them, from city of men to cattle and everything that was to be found; they also put the torch to all the cities that were to be found.
21 And the men of Israel had sworn at Mispah “Not a man of us will give his daughter to any of the Benjamites as wife.”
2 And the people came to Bethel and sat down there till evening before God, and raised their voices and wept, making a very great weeping,
3 and said “Why, Jehovah God of Israel, has this thing come to pass in Israel, that one tribe should be missing from Israel today?”
4 and the first thing the next day the people built an altar there, and offered burnt-offerings and welfare-sacrifices.
5 And the sons of Israel said “Who is there that did not come up to Jehovah in the assembly, of all the tribes of Israel?” because there had been the great oath for whoever did not come up to Mispah to Jehovah, that he must be put to death.
6 And the sons of Israel were sorry about their brother Benjamin, and said “One tribe has been hewn off from Israel today.
7 What shall we do for wives for them, the ones that are left, when we have sworn by Jehovah not to give them any of our daughters as wives?”
8 And they said “Who is there at all among the tribes of Israel that did not come to Mispah to Jehovah?” and it was found that not a man from Jabesh in Gilead had come to the camp to the assembly.
9 And the people were mustered, and it was found that there was not a man there of the inhabitants of Jabesh in Gilead.
10 And the congregation sent there twelve thousand of the most stalwart men, and gave them the order “Go and massacre the inhabitants of Jabesh in Gilead, including the women and children;
11 and this is the way you are to do, destroy without quarter every male, and every woman who has known a male’s embrace.”
12 And out of the inhabitants of Jabesh in Gilead they found four hundred virgin girls who had not known man in sexual embrace; and they brought them to the camp at Shiloh in the country of Canaan.
13 And all the congregation sent word to the sons of Benjamin on Rimmon Cliff, proclaiming peace to them;
14 and the Benjamites came back at that time, and they gave them the wives they had kept alive out of the women of Jabesh in Gilead, but even so they did not suffice for them.
15 And the people were sorry about the Benjamites, because Jehovah had broken into the tribes of Israel.
16 And the elders of the congregation said “What shall we do for wives for the ones that are left?” because womankind had been rooted out from Benjamin;
17 and “Benjamin has an estate of survivors, so that a tribe is not to be wiped out from Israel;
18 but we cannot give them wives out of our daughters” because the sons of Israel had sworn “Cursed is anyone who gives a wife to the Benjamites.”
19 And they said “Here is the feast of Jehovah at Shiloh annually, north of Bethel, east of the highway that goes up from Bethel to Shekem, and south of Lebonah”;
20 and they gave the sons of Benjamin the order “Go and lie in ambush in the vineyards,
21 and be looking, and if the Shiloh girls come out to dance the dances, come you out of the vineyards and catch yourselves a wife apiece out of the Shiloh girls, and go to the country of Benjamin.
22 And when their fathers or brothers come to complain to us, we will say to them “Let them off as a favor to us, because we did not take a wife apiece by fighting, for you did not give to them, then you would have been liable.”
23 And the sons of Benjamin did so, and carried off wives enough for their number out of the dancers they stole, and went home to their domain and rebuilt the cities and lived in them.
24 And upon that the sons of Israel wended their way from there to their several tribes and clans, and they went out from there to their several domains.
25 In those days there was no king in Israel: each did what suited him.
Ruth
1:1-22
1 And in the time when the judges judged there was a famine in the country, and a man from Bethlehem in Judah went to live as an immigrant in Moab, he and his wife and his two sons;
2 the man’s name was Elimelec and his wife’s name was Naomi, and the names of his two sons were Mahlon and Kiljon Ephrathites from Bethlehem in Judah.
And they went into Moab and were there;
3 and Naomi’s husband Elimelec died, and she and her two sons remained,
4 and she married them to Moabite wives, one named ʽOrpah and the other named Ruth.
And they lived there about ten years,
5 and Mahlon and Kiljon died too, both of them, and the woman remained, surviving her two children and her husband.
6 And she broke up her home, she and her daughters-in-law, and was going back out of Moab, because she had heard in Moab that Jehovah had looked after his people, giving them bread;
7 and she went out of the place where she was, and her two daughters-in-law with her, and went along the road to go back to Judah.
8 And Naomi said to her two daughters-in-law “Come on, go back to your mothers’ homes; may Jehovah be kind to you, as you have been to those who are dead and to me.
9 May Jehovah grant that each of you may find rest in a husband’s home”; and she kissed them.
And they raised their voices and wept,
10 and said to her “But we are going back with you to your people.”
11 But Naomi said “Go back, daughters; why should you go with me? do I still have sons in my body who would be husbands for you?
12 Go back, daughters, go, because I am too old to marry.
If I said ‘I have hopes’ and actually married tonight, or actually bore sons,
13 would you on that account have patience till they should grow up? would you on that account live single without marrying?
No, daughters, though I suffer bitterly because of you; for Jehovah’s hand has gone out against me.”
14 And they raised their voices and wept again, and ʽOrpah kissed her mother-in-law; but Ruth stayed by her.
15 And she said “There, your sister-in-law has gone back to her own people and her own god; go back, follow your sister-in-law.”
16 But Ruth said “Do not pray me to leave you, to go back from following you, because where you go I am going and where you stop for the night I will stop.
Your people is my people and your god is my god.
17 Where you die I will die, and there I will be buried.
Jehovah do so to me, and more, but it shall be death that separates you and me from each other.”
18 And she saw she was set on going with her, and left off talking to her.
19 And the two of them went till they came to Bethlehem.
And when they came to Bethlehem all the city was in a commotion over them, and they said “Is this Naomi?”
20 And she said to them “Do not call me Naomi, call me Mara, because Shaddai has made things very bitter for me.
21 I went full and Jehovah brought me back empty; why do you call me Naomi when Jehovah has indicted me and Shaddai has brought evil on me?”
22 And Naomi came back, and with her Ruth the Moabite, her daughter-in-law, who had followed her back from Moab, and they came to Bethlehem at the beginning of the barley harvest.
2 And Naomi had a relative of her husband’s, a stalwart man of Elimelec’s clan, named Boaz.
2 And Ruth the Moabite said to Naomi “Let me go to the field and glean ears of the grain behind whoever is kind to me”; and she told her “Go, daughter.”
3 And she went off and came and gleaned in the field behind the reapers, and she happened into the section of the field that belonged to Boaz, who was of Elimelec’s clan,
4 and there came Boaz out of Bethlehem and said to the reapers “Jehovah be with you,” and they said to him “Jehovah bless you.”
5 And Boaz said to his man who was superintending the reapers “Whose is this girl?”
6 and the man superintending the reapers answered “That is a Moabite girl, the one that came back with Naomi out of Moab;
7 and she said ‘Let me glean and pick up among the shocks behind the reapers,’ and she came and has been on her feet ever since it was daylight till right now; her sitting down in the house has been only a little.”
8 And Boaz said to Ruth “Do you hear, daughter? do not go gleaning in another field, and do not cross over out of this; stick here by my girls;
9 keep your eyes on the field they are reaping and follow them the boys have my orders not to touch you; and when you are thirsty go to the jars and take a drink out of what the boys draw.”
10 And she threw herself down on her face and did reverence on the ground, and said to him “How comes it you are kind enough to notice me when I am a foreigner?”
11 And Boaz answered “I have been told all about what you did for your mother-in-law after your husband’s death and how you left your father and mother and your native country and went to a people you had not known before.
12 May Jehovah requite your actions, and your reward be thorough from Israel’s God Jehovah under whose wings you have come to take shelter.”
13 And she said “Thank you, sir, for cheering me up and speaking kindly to your servant, when I am not the like of one of your slave-girls.”
14 And Boaz said to her at eating-time “Come here and have some of the bread and dip your piece in the sauce”; and she sat down beside the reapers, and he passed her roasted grain, and she ate till she had all she wanted, and left some over.
15 And she stood up to glean, and Boaz gave the men the order “She is to glean right in between the shocks and you are not to snub her; and, too,
16 you are to pull some out of the armfuls and leave it for her, and she is to glean and you are not to scold her.”
17 And she gleaned in the field till evening; and she beat out what she had gleaned, and it came to about a bushel of barley;
18 and she took it up and went into the city.
And her mother-in-law saw what she had gleaned, and she took out and gave to her what she had had left over from eating all she wanted.
19 And her mother-in-law said to her “Where did you glean today? on which side did you work? may the one who took notice of you be blessed.”
And she told her mother-in-law the one with whom she had worked, and said “The name of the man I worked with today is Boaz.”
20 And Naomi said to her daughter-in-law “Blessed be he of Jehovah, that he has never left off his friendliness with the living and with the dead.”
And Naomi said to her “The man is a near relative to us, one of our immediate family.”
21 And Ruth the Moabite said “Another thing: he said to me ‘You are to stick by my boys till they finish reaping all of the field that is mine.’”
22 And Naomi said to her daughter-in-law Ruth “It is best, daughter, that you go out with his girls and they do not encounter you in another field.”
23 And she stuck by Boaz’s girls, gleaning till the barley harvest and the wheat harvest were finished; and she stayed with her mother-in-law.
3 And her mother-in-law Naomi said to her “Daughter, I am to look for a resting-place for you isn’t that right? that will be good for you.
2 And now Boaz, whose girls you have been with, is our relative, you know.
Here will he be winnowing the barley threshing-floor tonight;
3 take a bath and oil yourself and dress and go down to the threshing-floor; do not disclose yourself to the man till he has finished eating and drinking;
4 and when he lies down find out the place where he lies and come and lift the blanket at his feet and lie down, and he will tell you what you are to do.”
5 And she said to her “I will do just as you say,”
6 and went down to the threshing-floor and did just as her mother-in-law had charged her to.
7 And Boaz ate and drank and was feeling well, and came to lie down at the edge of the heap of grain, and she came quietly and lifted the blanket at his feet and lay down.
8 And at midnight the man was startled and rolled over and found there was a woman lying at his feet;
9 and he said “Who are you?” and she said “I am your servant Ruth; spread the flap of your cloak over your servant, because you are next of kin.”
10 And he said “Blessed be you of Jehovah, daughter; you have shown a better friendship last than first, not going after the young men, rich or poor.
11 And now, daughter, do not be afraid: I will do for you just as you say, because all the gate of my people knows you are a worthy woman.
12 But now the thing is, I certainly am a next of kin, but there is also a next of kin closer than I am.
13 Stay through the night, and in the morning if he will act as next of kin to you, all right, let him; but if he is not disposed to, then I will do it, as Jehovah lives.
Lie still till morning.”
14 And she lay at his feet till morning, and stood up before one man could recognize another; and he thought “It must not be known that the woman had come to the threshing-floor,”
15 and said “Let’s have the shawl you have on; hold on to it”; and she held on to it, and he measured out six of barley and set it on her, and went into the city.
16 And she came to her mother-in-law, and she said “How did you come out, daughter?” and she told her everything that the man had done with her,
17 and said “He gave me these six of barley, because he said ‘Do not come to your mother-in-law empty-handed.’”
18 And she said “Stay here, daughter, till you know how things will go, because the man will not stop without finishing the business today.”
4 And Boaz had gone up to the gate and sat down there; and along came the next of kin of whom Boaz had spoken, and he said “Come over and sit down here, So-and-so!” and he came over and sat down.
2 And he took ten men, elders of the city, and said “Sit down here,” and they did.
3 And he said to the next of kin “Naomi, the one that has come back from Moab, has sold out brother Elimelec’s share of the field;
4 and I thought I would give you notice to buy in the presence of those who are sitting here and of the elders of my people.
If you will redeem, do so; and if you will not, tell me so that I may know, because there is you to redeem, and I come after you.”
And he said “I will redeem”;
5 and Boaz said “On the day that you get the land out of Naomi’s hands you also get Moabite Ruth, the dead man’s widow, to set up the dead man’s name over his estate.”
6 And the next of kin said “I shall not be able to redeem personally, for fear of impairing my estate; do the redeeming for me yourself, because I shall not be able to redeem.”
7 And there was formerly this in Israel for redemption and for substitution, to validate every transaction: a man took off his sandal and gave it to the other party, and this was the attestation in Israel;
8 and the next of kin said to Boaz “Buy for yourself” and took off his sandal.
9 And Boaz said to the elders’ and all the people “You are witnesses today that I buy out of Naomi’s hands everything that belonged to Elimelec and everything that belonged to Kiljon and Mahlon,
10 and I also buy Mahlon’s widow Moabite Ruth for my wife, to set up the dead man’s name over his estate and not have the dead man’s name disappear from among his brothers and from the gate of his people; you are witnesses today.”
11 And all the people in the gate and the elders said “We are: Jehovah grant the woman who is coming into your house to be like Rachel and Leah, the two that built up the house of Israel; may you earn high standing in Ephrathah and make a name in Bethlehem,
12 and your family be like the family of Peres whom Tamar bore to Judah, by the issue which Jehovah shall give you out of this girl.”
13 And Boaz took Ruth and she became his wife; and he went in to her and Jehovah gave her motherhood, and she had a son;
14 and the women said to Naomi “Blessed be Jehovah, who has not deprived you today of a next of kin whose name may be called in Israel,
15 and whom you will have as a lifesaver to provide for your old age, because your daughter-in-law who loves you, who is better to you than seven sons, has given him birth.”
16 And Naomi took the child and laid him in her lap and became caretaker to him.
17 And the neighbor women called him by a name, saying “Naomi has had a son born to her,” and named him ʽObed; he was the father of Jesse the father of David.
18 And this is Peres’s line. Peres begot Hesron,
19 and Hesron begot Ram, and Ram begot ʽAmminadab,
20 and ʽAmminadab begot Nahshon, and Nahshon begot Salmon,
21 and Salmon begot Boaz, and Boaz begot ʽObed,
22 and ʽObed begot Jesse, and Jesse begot David.
1 Samuel
1:1-28
1 Now there was a certain man of Ramathaim, a Suphite of the highland of Ephraim, named Elkanah, son of Jeroham the son of Elihu the son of Tohu the son of Suph, an Ephrathite.
2 And he had two wives: one’s name was Hannah and the other’s was Peninnah; and Peninnah had children, but Hannah had no children.
3 And this man went up from his city from year to year to do reverence and to sacrifice to Jehovah of Armies at Shiloh; and ʽEli’s two sons Hophni and Pinehas, priests of Jehovah, were there.
4 And one day Elkanah was sacrificing; and he would give a portion to his wife Peninnah and portions to all her sons and daughters,
5 but would give Hannah one portion in vexation, because he loved Hannah and Jehovah had shut her womb;
6 and her rival provoked her besides, to make her fret, because Jehovah had shut up her womb;
7 and thus he did year by year, as often as she went up to Jehovah’s house; thus she provoked her. And Hannah cried and did not eat.
8 And her husband Elkanah said to her “Hannah, why do you cry? why are you not eating? why do you feel badly? am I not more to you than ten sons?”
9 And Hannah rose after they had eaten at Shiloh, and went and stood before Jehovah, while Priest ʽEli was sitting on his chair by the doorpost of the temple of Jehovah;
10 and, she being sore at heart, she prayed to Jehovah and wept tears,
11 and made a vow and said “Jehovah of Armies, if you look upon your servant’s wretched state and remember me, and do not forget your servant but give your servant a man-child, then I will give him to Jehovah all his life, and no razor shall touch his head.”
12 And, as she was long praying before Jehovah, ʽEli watched her mouth;
13 and Hannah was speaking inwardly only her lips moved, but her voice was not audible and ʽEli thought she was drunk.
14 And ʽEli said to her “How long are you going to exhibit your drunkenness?
Get rid of your wine.”
15 But Hannah answered “No, sir, I am a woman in trouble; I have not been drinking wine or beer; I was pouring out my soul before Jehovah.
16 Do not take it as if your servant were a reprobate; it was owing to the greatness of my grievance and provocation that I spoke so long.”
17 And ʽEli answered “Go, and good betide you; and may the God of Israel grant your request that you have asked of him.”
18 And she said “Thank you, sir.”
And the woman went her way, and ate, and no longer had the look in her face.
19 And when they rose the next morning they did reverence before Jehovah and came back to their home at Ramah.
And Elkanah knew his wife Hannah, and Jehovah remembered her;
20 and at the turn of the year she had a son, and named him Samuel “because I asked Jehovah for him.”
21 And the man Elkanah, and all his family, went up to sacrifice to Jehovah the annual sacrifice and his vow.
22 But Hannah did not go up; for she said to her husband “Not till the boy is weaned, when I will bring him and he shall appear in the presence of Jehovah and stay there permanently”;
23 and Elkanah her husband said to her “Do what you think best: stay till you wean him; only let Jehovah make good his word.”
24 And the woman stayed and nursed her son till she weaned him; and when she had weaned him she brought him up with her, with a three-year-old steer and bread and a bushel of flour and a skin of wine, and came to Jehovah’s house at Shiloh, with the boy with them;
25 and they came before Jehovah, and his father made the sacrifice that he made year by year to Jehovah, and brought the boy and slaughtered the steer; and Hannah the boy’s mother brought the boy to ʽEli
26 and said “O, my lord, as you live, my lord, I am the woman who stood here by you to pray to Jehovah.
27 It was for this boy that I prayed, and Jehovah has granted me my request that I asked of him.
28 And I on my part have granted him to Jehovah; ever since he has been, he is granted to Jehovah.”
2:1-36
2 And Hannah prayed and said “My heart exults in Jehovah, my horn is uplifted in Jehovah, my mouth opens wide against my enemies, because I rejoice in your deliverance.
2 There is no Holy One like Jehovah; for there is none but you; and there is no Rock like our God.
3 Talk not overmuch loftily, loftily, arrogance coming out of your mouths; for Jehovah is a God of knowledge; and are not deeds measured out?
4 Champions’ bows are shivered, and men who were stumbling have girded themselves with stoutness;
5 Well-fed men have hired themselves out for bread, and hungry men have ceased; even the barren has borne seven, and she who had many children is forlorn.
6 Jehovah puts to death and brings to life, brings down to the world below, and up.
7 Jehovah impoverishes and enriches, abases and exalts,
8 Lifts the poor man from the dust, raises the needy man from the rubbish-dump, to seat him with nobles and allot to him a throne of glory; For the pillars of the earth are Jehovah’s, and he has set the world upon them.
9 He guards the feet of his godly, and ungodly men are stilled in darkness; for not by strength does a man prevail.
10 Jehovah strikes with dismay the one who contends with him, thunders over him in the sky; Jehovah pronounces judgment for the ends of the earth,
to give power to his king and uplift the horn of his anointed.”
11 And she left him there before Jehovah and went to Ramah. And the boy officiated in the service of Jehovah before Priest ʽEli.
12 And ʽEli’s sons were reprobates who did not know Jehovah
13 nor the due of the priest from the people; when any man was offering a sacrifice, the priest’s man would come when they were boiling the flesh, with the three-tined fork in his hand,
14 and strike it into the kettle or pipkin or caldron or stewpan; whatever the fork brought up, the priest took to himself.
Thus they did to all Israel who came there to Shiloh.
15 Even before they had burned the fat, the priest’s man would come and say to the man who was sacrificing “Give flesh to roast for the priest, so that he shall not get boiled flesh from you, but raw.”
16 And the man would say “They have to burn the fat first; then take whatever you like.” And he would say “No, you are to give it now; if not, I take it by force.”
17 And the young men’s sin was very great before Jehovah, because people held Jehovah’s offerings in contempt.
18 And Samuel, a boy belted with a white linen ephod, was officiating before Jehovah.
19 And his mother made him a little robe and brought it up to him when she came up with her husband to offer the annual sacrifice.
20 And ʽEli blessed Elkanah and his wife, and said “May Jehovah repay you with offspring by this woman for the grant that has been made to Jehovah.”
And they went to their place.
21 And Jehovah visited Hannah, and she conceived and had three sons and two daughters; and the boy Samuel grew up with Jehovah.
22 And ʽEli, who was very old, used to hear of all that his sons were doing to all Israel, and their lying with the women who did duty at the door of the Tent of Meeting;
23 and he said to them “Why do you do such things as these, that I hear these bad things about you from all the people?
24 Do not do it, my sons; for the report that I hear Jehovah’s people circulating is not good.
25 If a man sins against a man, God will mediate; but if a man sins against Jehovah, who shall mediate for him?” but his sons would not obey their father, because it was Jehovah’s pleasure to cause their death.
26 And the boy Samuel went on pleasing both Jehovah and men.
27 And a man of God came to ʽEli and said to him “Says Jehovah, I did reveal myself to your family when they were in Egypt, the Pharaoh’s home,
28 and chose it out of all the tribes of Israel to be priests to me, to go up my altar, to burn incense and bear an ephod before me, and gave your family all the fire-offerings of the sons of Israel.
29 Why do you look askance at my sacrifices and offerings which I have ordained, and rank your sons above me, fattening them on the prime of the offerings of Israel my people?
30 So Israel’s God Jehovah quoth, I did say your family, your own and the family you come of, should walk before me forever; but now, quoth Jehovah, away with the thought; for those who honor me I will honor, and those who despise me shall be of little account.
31 Here are days coming when I will hew off your arm and the arm of your kin, that there shall never be an old man in your family in all time.
32 And you will look upon a rival in my dwelling amid all the good that is done to Israel, and never again will there be an old man in your house.
33 But not every man of yours will I cut off from my altar, to consume your eyes and to famish your soul; but all the main body of your family shall die by the sword of men.
34 And this is the token you are to have, what shall come to your two sons Hophni and Pinehas: they shall both die in one day.
35 And I will set up for myself a steadfast priest; he shall do as is in my heart and mind; and I will build him a steadfast house, and he shall walk before my anointed for all time.
36 And whoever is left in your family shall come to do reverence to him for a bit of silver and a biscuit, and shall say ‘Please attach me to one of the priestly offices, so that I can eat a morsel of bread.’”
3 And the boy Samuel was officiating in the service of Jehovah before ʽEli and Jehovah’s word was rare in those days; there was no widespread seeing of visions
2 and on that day, while ʽEli was lying in his place (his eyes had begun to grow dim so that he could not see),
3 and the lamp of God had not yet gone out, and Samuel was lying in the temple of Jehovah, where the ark of God was,
4 Jehovah called “Samuel, Samuel!” and he said “Here I am,”
5 and ran to ʽEli and said “Here I am, because you called me.”
And he said “I did not call; go back and lie down.”
And he went and lay down.
6 And again Jehovah called “Samuel, Samuel!” and he went to ʽEli and said “Here I am, because you called me”; and he said “I did not call, my son; go back and lie down.”
7 (And Samuel did not yet know Jehovah, and Jehovah’s word was not yet revealed to him.)
8 And Jehovah called Samuel for the third time; and he ran and went to ʽEli and said “Here I am, because you called me”; and ʽEli perceived that Jehovah was calling the boy.
9 And ʽEli said to Samuel “Go and lie down, and if he calls to you say ‘Speak, Jehovah, for your servant is listening’”; and Samuel went and lay down in his place.
10 And Jehovah came and stood and called, as he had before, “Samuel, Samuel!” and Samuel said “Speak, for your servant is listening.”
11 And Jehovah said to Samuel “Lo, I will do such a thing in Israel that when anybody hears of it both his ears will buzz.
12 On that day I will make good to ʽEli everything that I have denounced against his family, and do it all at once.
13 And I will tell him that I will execute a perpetual judgment upon his family, because he knew that his sons were insulting God and he did not check them;
14 and so I swear to ʽEli’s family that the offense of ʽEli’s family shall not be purged by sacrifice and offering forever.”
15 And Samuel lay abed till morning, and in the morning he opened the door of Jehovah’s house.
And Samuel was afraid to tell ʽEli the vision.
16 And ʽEli called Samuel and said “Samuel, my son!” and he said “Here I am.”
17 And he said “What was the word that he spoke to you? now do not conceal it from me; Jehovah do so to you, and more, if you conceal from me anything of all the words that he spoke to you.”
18 And Samuel told him every word, and did not conceal it from him; and he said “It is Jehovah; he will do as he sees fit.”
19 And Samuel grew, and Jehovah was with him and did not let any of his words fall to the ground;
20 and all Israel from Dan to Beer-Shebaʽ knew that Samuel was to be depended on as a prophet of Jehovah.
21 And Jehovah continued to appear in Shiloh; for Jehovah revealed himself in Shiloh, by his word, to Samuel;
4 and all Israel had Samuel’s word.
And ʽEli grew very old, and his sons went on and on, and their course was displeasing to Jehovah.
2 And the Philistines gave battle to the Israelites, and the battle went badly, and the Israelites were beaten by the Philistines, and they killed about four thousand men in line in the field.
3 And when the men got to camp, the elders of Israel said “Why did Jehovah cause us to be beaten by the Philistines today? let us get the ark of our God from Shiloh, that it may go out in our midst and save us out of the hands of our enemies.”
4 And the men sent to Shiloh and carried off from there the ark of Jehovah who sits upon the cherubs; and ʽEli’s two sons were with the ark, Hophni and Pinehas.
5 And when the ark of Jehovah came to the camp all the Israelites gave a great cheer so that the earth quivered;
6 and the Philistines heard the sound of the cheering and said “What is this sound of great cheering in the camp of the Hebrews?” and they learned that the ark of Jehovah had come to the camp.
7 And the Philistines were afraid; for they said “A god has come to the camp”; and they said “Woe to us! for there has not been anything like this before.
8 Woe to us! who shall deliver us out of the hands of these grand gods? these are the gods that struck the Egyptians all those blows in the wilderness.
9 Do your best, be men, Philistines, that you may not be slaves to the Hebrews as they were to you; be men, and fight!”
10 And the Philistines fought, and the Israelites were beaten and fled each to his home; and the losses were very great, and there fell of the Israelites three thousand footmen,
11 and the ark of God was taken, and ʽEli’s two sons, Hophni and Pinehas, were killed.
12 And a man of Benjamin ran from the battle and came to Shiloh that same day with his brigandine torn and earth on his head;
13 and when he came he found ʽEli sitting in his chair at the side of the gate watching along the road, for he felt alarmed for the ark of God.
And the man went in to tell the news in the city, and all the city raised an outcry;
14 and ʽEli heard the sound of the cry, and said “What is this noise of an uproar?”
And the man came in haste and told ʽEli;
15 (now ʽEli was ninety-eight years old, and his eyes were set so that he could not see);
16 and the man said to ʽEli “I am the one who came from the army; I ran from the battle today.”
And he said “How was it, my son?”
17 And the man with the news answered “The Israelites ran before the Philistines, and there was a great slaughter of our men too, and both your sons are killed too, and the ark of God is taken.”
18 And when he mentioned the ark of God ʽEli fell backward off his chair at the side of the gate, and his neck was broken, and he died for the man was old and heavy.
And he had judged Israel forty years.
19 And his daughter-in-law, Pinehas’s wife, was on the point of having a child; and she heard the report about the capture of the ark of God and the death of her father-in-law and her husband, and she crouched down and gave birth to her child, because her pains came upon her,
20 and died forthwith.
And the women who stood over her spoke to her, saying “Do not be afraid, for you have borne a son,” but she made no answer and gave no heed.
21 And she called the boy Icabod, saying “Israel’s glory is gone,” with reference to the capture of the ark of God and to her father-in-law and her husband.
22 And she said “Israel’s glory is gone,” because the ark of God was taken.
5:1-12
5 And the Philistines had taken the ark of God and brought it from the Help Stone to Ashdod.
2 And the Philistines took the ark of God and brought it into the house of Dagon and placed it beside Dagon.
3 And the next morning, the first thing, the Ashdodites came into the house of Dagon and found Dagon down on his face on the ground before the ark of Jehovah.
And they lifted Dagon to his feet and put him back in his place.
4 And the first thing in the morning on the next day they found Dagon down on his face on the ground before the ark of Jehovah, and Dagon’s head and both his hands knocked off against the threshold.
5 (This is why the priests of Dagon, and all who go into the house of Dagon, never step on Dagon’s threshold in Ashdod, to this day.)
6 And Jehovah’s hand was heavy on the Ashdodites, and he desolated them and smote them with buboes, Ashdod and its territory.
7 And the men of Ashdod saw that it was so, and went to saying “The ark of the god of Israel must not stay with us, because his hand is hard on us and on our god Dagon”;
8 and they sent and called together to their city all the Sarns of the Philistines and said “What shall we do with the ark of the god of Israel?” and they said “Let the ark of the god of Israel be brought around to Gath.”
9 And they brought around the ark of the God of Israel; and after it was brought around Jehovah’s hand was upon the city in a prodigious ravage, and he smote the men of the city, great and small, and buboes broke out on them.
10 And they sent the ark of God away to ʽEkron; and when the ark of God came into ʽEkron the ʽEkronites raised an outcry “They have brought the ark of the god of Israel around to me, to kill me and my people”;
11 and they sent and called together all the Sarns of the Philistines and said “Send the ark of the god of Israel away, so that it may go back to its place and not kill me and my people”; for there was a deadly ravage all through the city, Jehovah’s hand was very heavy there.
12 And the men who did not die were smitten with the buboes, and the city’s clamor went up to the skies.
6 And the ark of Jehovah was in the Philistines’ countryside seven months.
2 And the Philistines called the priests and the diviners with the question “What shall we do with the ark of Jehovah? inform us with what observance we shall send it away to its own place.”
3 And they said “If you are sending away the ark of the god of Israel, do not send it away portionless but return it an indemnity: then you shall be restored to health, and it shall become manifest to you why his hand is not taken off from you.”
4 And they said “What is to be the indemnity that we return to it?”
And they said “The same number as the Sarns of the Philistines, five golden buboes, because you and your Sarns suffered one and the same calamity.
5 And you shall make golden mice, a likeness of your mice that are ravaging the country, and give glory to the god of Israel: perhaps he may lift off his hand from you and your gods and your country.
6 And why should you act haughtily as the Pharaoh and the Egyptians did? after he had done his will upon them they let them go in the end, did they not?
7 Now get and fit out a new cart and two cows with sucking calves, cows that have never had a yoke put on them, and hitch the cows to the cart and take the calves back home away from the mothers,
8 and take the ark of Jehovah and set it on the cart, and put in the box at its side the golden objects that you return to it as indemnity, and send it off and let it go,
9 and see: if it goes up toward Beth-Shemesh, toward its own territory, it was he that did us this great harm; but if not, we shall know that it was not his hand that touched us, it was a chance that happened to us.”
10 And the men did so: they took two cows with sucking calves and hitched them to the cart, and shut up their calves at home,
11 and put the ark of Jehovah on the cart, and the box and the golden mice;
12 and the cows took a straight course toward Beth-Shemesh, going along one highway, mooing as they went, and not turning off to right or to left; and the Sarns of the Philistines went behind them to the Beth-Shemesh boundary.
13 And the men of Beth-Shemesh, who were reaping the wheat harvest in the vale, raised their eyes and saw the ark and came joyfully to meet it;
14 and the cart came into the field of Joshuaʽ the Beth-Shemite, and stood there, where there was a great stone; and they split the wood of the cart and sacrificed the cows as a burnt-offering to Jehovah.
15 And the Levites took down the ark of Jehovah and the box that was with it, in which the golden objects were, and put them on the great stone, and the men of Beth-Shemesh offered burnt-offerings and sacrifices on that day to Jehovah;
16 and the five Sarns of the Philistines saw it, and went back to ʽEkron that same day.
17 And these are the golden buboes which the Philistines returned as indemnity to Jehovah: for Ashdod one, for Ghaza one, for Ashkelon one, for Gath one, for ʽEkron one;
18 and golden mice to the number of all the cities of the Philistines, for the five Sarns, from fortified city to country hamlet.
And the great stone on which they put down the ark of Jehovah is still in the field of Joshuaʽ the Beth-Shemite to this day.
19 And the sons of Jeconiah were not blithe among the men of Beth-Shemesh when they looked upon the ark of Jehovah; and he smote among them seventy men; and the people mourned, because Jehovah had made great havoc among the people.
20 And the men of Beth-Shemesh said “Who can stand before this holy God Jehovah? to whom may he go up away from us?”
21 and sent messengers to the inhabitants of Kirjath-Jeʽarim to say “The Philistines have sent back the ark of Jehovah: come down and fetch it up to yourselves.”
7 And the men of Kirjath-Jeʽarim came and fetched up the ark of Jehovah and put it into the house of Abinadab on the hill, and consecrated his son Eleazar to have charge of the ark of Jehovah.
2 And from the day of the settlement of the ark in Kirjath-Jeʽarim, the time was long: it was twenty years; and all the house of Israel turned to follow Jehovah.
3 And Samuel said to all the house of Israel “If you are coming back to Jehovah with all your hearts, remove the foreign gods from among you, and the ʽAshtarts, and direct your hearts to Jehovah and worship him alone, that he may deliver you out of the hands of the Philistines”;
4 and the sons of Israel removed the Baals and the ʽAshtarts, and worshiped Jehovah alone.
5 And Samuel said “Gather all Israel at Mispah, and let me pray to Jehovah for you”;
6 and they gathered at Mispah, and drew water and poured it out before Jehovah, and fasted on that day; and they said there “We have sinned against Jehovah.”
And Samuel passed judgment on the sons of Israel at Mispah.
7 And the Philistines heard that the sons of Israel had gathered themselves at Mispah, and the Sarns of the Philistines came up against Israel; and the sons of Israel heard of it, and were afraid of the Philistines.
8 And the sons of Israel said to Samuel “Do not shut your mouth against us and refuse to cry to our God Jehovah to deliver us out of the hands of the Philistines.”
9 And Samuel took a sucking lamb and offered it as an entire burnt-offering to Jehovah; and Samuel cried to Jehovah for Israel, and Jehovah answered him.
10 And as Samuel was offering the burnt-offering the Philistines came on to fight a battle with the Israelites; and Jehovah thundered loudly over the Philistines on that day, and threw them into confusion, and they were beaten by the Israelites.
11 And the men of Israel came out from Mispah and pursued the Philistines and cut them down till below Beth-Car.
12 And Samuel took a stone and set it between Mispah and Jeshanah, and named it the Help Stone, and said “Thus far Jehovah helped us.”
13 And the Philistines were humbled, and no longer entered the territory of Israel; and Jehovah’s hand was against the Philistines throughout Samuel’s life.
14 And the cities that the Philistines had taken from Israel came back to Israel, from ʽEkron to Gath, and Israel recovered the territory of these cities out of the hands of the Philistines.
15 And Samuel judged Israel all his life;
16 and he went year by year in circuit to Bethel and the Gilgal and Mispah, and judged Israel at all these sanctuaries.
17 But his headquarters was at Ramah, because his home was there; and there he judged Israel, and built an altar there to Jehovah.
8:1-22
8 And when Samuel grew old he installed his sons as judges of Israel:
2 the name of his older son was Joel, and of his second son Abijah, judges at Beer-Shebaʽ.
3 And his sons did not follow his paths, but turned aside after profit, and took bribes, and warped the law.
4 And all the elders of Israel assembled and came to Samuel at Ramah
5 and said to him “Here you have grown old, and your sons have not been following your paths: now appoint us a king to judge us, like all the nations.”
6 And the thing displeased Samuel when they said “Give us a king to judge us,” and Samuel prayed to Jehovah.
7 And Jehovah said to Samuel “Obey the people in everything that they say to you; for it is not you but me that they have rejected as king over them.
8 As in all the things that they have done to me from the day that I brought them up out of Egypt to this day, leaving me and worshiping other gods, so they are doing to you too.
9 Now obey them; only you shall make a protest to them and tell them about the government of the king who will reign over them.”
10 And Samuel told all Jehovah’s words to the people who were asking him for a king:
11 he said “This is what the government of the king who will reign over you will be. He will take your sons and put them to his carriages and his horse guards, and they shall run before his carriages;
12 and to be appointed as his captains over a thousand or over fifty, and to do his plowing and harvesting, and to make his weapons and the fittings for his carriages.
13 And he will take your daughters for perfumers and cooks and bakers.
14 And he will take the best of your fields and vineyards and olive-orchards and give them to his officers.
15 And he will take a tenth of your grain and fruit and give it to his eunuchs and officers.
16 And he will take the best of your slaves and oxen and your donkeys to do his work with.
17 And he will take a tenth of your sheep and you will be his slaves,
18 and will cry out in that day because of your king whom you chose to have, and Jehovah will not hear you in that day.”
19 But the people refused to obey Samuel, and said “No, we will have a king over us
20 and be the same as all the nations are, and have our king judge us and go out before us and fight our battles.”
21 And Samuel heard all the words of the people, and repeated them for Jehovah to hear;
22 and Jehovah said to Samuel “Obey them and set up a king over them.”
And Samuel said to the men of Israel “Go home to your cities.”
9 And there was a man in Benjamin, named Kish, son of Abiel the son of Seror the son of Becorath the son of Aphiah the son of a Benjamite, a stalwart man;
2 and he had a son named Saul, a young man and a fine one; not a man of the sons of Israel was finer than he; he was head and shoulders taller than any of the people.
3 And Saul’s father Kish lost his donkeys; and Kish said to his son Saul “Take one of the men with you and go look for the donkeys.”
4 And they went through the highland of Ephraim and through the Shalishah country and did not find them, and through the Shaʽalim country and they were not there, and through the Benjamite country and did not find them;
5 and when they came to the country of Suph, Saul said to his man who was with him “Come, let us go back, for fear father should leave off about the donkeys and grow anxious about us.”
6 And he said to him “Here, in this city there is a man of God, and the man is highly thought of; everything that he says is sure to come true.
Now let us go there; perhaps he will tell us about our errand that we went on.”
7 And Saul said to his servant “Well, suppose we go, what shall we bring the man? for the bread is gone out of our haversacks, and there is no fee to bring to the man of God; what have we with us?”
8 And the servant still had an answer for Saul, and said “Here, I have about me a quarter of a shekel of silver that I will give to the man of God and have him tell us about our errand.”
9 (Formerly in Israel a man said, when he went to inquire of God, “Come, let us go to the seer”; for the prophet of today used to be called seer.)
10 And Saul said to his man “All right; come, let us go”; and they went to the city where the man of God was.
11 As they were going up the slope to the city they found girls coming out to draw water, and said to them “Is the seer here?”
12 and they answered “Yes, he is right ahead of you; he has just come to the city today, because today the people have a sacrifice at the height;
13 just as you go into the city you will find him, before he goes up to the height to eat for the people will not eat till he comes, because he blesses the sacrifice and afterward the guests eat.
Go right up, for today you will find him.”
14 And they went up to the city; and as they were coming into the city, there was Samuel coming toward them on his way out to go up to the height.
15 And Jehovah had given Samuel notice one day before Saul came,
16 “At this time tomorrow I will send you a man from the Benjamites’ country, and you shall anoint him warden over my people Israel, to save my people out of the hands of the Philistines; for I have seen the wretched state of my people; for their outcry has reached me.”
17 And as Samuel saw Saul, Jehovah answered him “Here is the man of whom I said to you ‘He shall sway my people.’”
18 And Saul approached Samuel in the middle of the gate and said “Please tell me where the seer’s house is.” 19 And Samuel answered Saul “I am the seer; go up to the height before me and eat with me today, and I will send you away in the morning and tell you everything that you have in mind.
20 And as to the donkeys you lost three days ago today, do not mind them, for they are found and whose is everything choice in Israel? is it not yours, and for all your family?”
21 And Saul answered “Am I not a Benjamite, from one of the smallest tribes in Israel, and my clan the least of the clans of the tribe of Benjamin? why do you talk like that to me?”
22 And Samuel took Saul and his man and brought them to the vestry and gave them a place at the head of the guests, of whom there were about thirty.
23 And Samuel said to the cook “Bring the portion that I gave you, that I told you to put by.”
24 And the cook lifted the leg and carried it up and set it before Saul; and he said “Here what is left is set before you; eat, for it was kept to this occasion for you; carve before the people.”
And Saul ate with Samuel that day,
25 and they went down from the height to the city; and they made a bed for Saul on the roof, and he slept there.
26 And at dawn Samuel called to the roof to Saul “Get up, and I will start you off”; and Saul got up, and the two of them, he and Samuel, went outdoors.
27 And as they were in the skirts of the city going down, Samuel said to Saul “Tell the man to pass on before us and stop here yourself; now I will let you hear God’s word.”
10:1-27
10 And Samuel took his flask of oil and poured it on his head, and kissed him, and said to him “It is because Jehovah has anointed you warden over his people Israel, and you shall sway Jehovah’s people, and you shall save them out of the hands of their enemies on all sides.
2 And this is the sign you are to have that Jehovah has anointed you as warden of his estate: as you go from me today you will find two men by Rachel’s grave at the boundary-line of Benjamin, at Selsah, and they will say to you ‘The donkeys that you went to look for are found, and now your father has dropped the matter of the donkeys and is anxious about you, saying “What shall I do for my son?”’
3 And you will go on beyond there and come to the Tabor Oak, and three men going up to God’s place at Bethel will fall in with you there, one carrying three kids and one carrying three cakes of bread and one carrying a skin of wine;
4 and they will ask you how you are doing, and give you two cakes of bread, and you shall receive it from them.
5 After that you will come to Gibeath-ha-Elohim, where the Philistines’ prefect is; and as you come to the city there you will encounter a company of prophets coming down from the height, with harp and tambourine and flute and lyre before them, and under the power;
6 and the spirit of Jehovah will seize upon you, and you will fall under the power with them and be turned into another man.
7 And when these tokens present themselves to you, do as occasion offers; for God is with you.
8 And go down before me to the Gilgal; I will be coming down to you to offer burnt-offerings and sacrifice welfare-sacrifices; seven days you shall wait, till I come to you and let you know what you are to do.”
9 And when he turned his back to go from Samuel, God transformed his heart, and all these tokens presented themselves to him that same day.
10 And they came there to Gibeah, and found a company of prophets coming on and meeting them; and a divine spirit seized upon him, and he fell under the power and was among them.
11 And everybody who had known him previously saw how he was with the prophets and under the power; and the people said to each other “What is this that has happened to Kish’s son? is Saul too among the prophets?”
12 and a man from there answered “And who is their father?”
Hence it became a proverb “Is Saul too among the prophets?”
13 And he came out of the power and came to the height;
14 and Saul’s uncle said to him and his man “Where did you go?” and he said “Looking for the donkeys; and we saw there was nothing to be found of them, and came to Samuel.”
15 And Saul’s uncle said “O, tell me what Samuel said to you.”
16 And Saul said to his uncle “He told us all right that the donkeys had been found,” but did not tell him that about the kingship that Samuel had said.
17 And Samuel called the people out to Jehovah’s place at Mispah,
18 and said to the sons of Israel “Says Jehovah, the God of Israel, ‘I brought Israel up from Egypt, and delivered you out of the hands of the Egyptians and of all the kingdoms that oppressed you;
19 and you today have rejected your God who was your savior out of all your hardships and distresses, and have said “No, but appoint a king over us.”
Now, then, take your stand before Jehovah by tribes and by thousands.’”
20 And Samuel brought forward all the tribes of Israel, and the tribe of Benjamin was fixed upon;
21 and he brought forward the tribe of Benjamin by clans, and the clan of the Matrites was fixed upon; and he brought forward the clan of the Matrites by men, and Saul the son of Kish was fixed upon; and they looked for him, but he was not to be found.
22 And they put the question to Jehovah again “Has the man come here?” and Jehovah said “He is in among the baggage hiding.”
23 And they ran and fetched him from there, and he stood up among the people and was tallest of the people by a head and shoulders;
24 and Samuel said to all the people “Do you see the man Jehovah has chosen, how there is no one like him among all the people?” and all the people cheered and said “Long live the king!”
25 And Samuel stated to the people the law of the kingship, and wrote it down as a document and deposited it before Jehovah; and Samuel sent all the people home.
26 And Saul too went home to Gibeah, and with him went the brave men whose hearts God had touched.
27 But the reprobates said “What will this man do toward saving us?” and despised him and brought him no present.
11:1-15
11 And after about a month Nahash the ʽAmmonite came up and beleaguered Jabesh in Gilead; and all the men of Jabesh said to Nahash “Make terms with us, and we will be your subjects.”
2 And Nahash the ʽAmmonite said to them “I will make these terms with you, to put out every right eye among you and lay it on all Israel for a slur.”
3 And the elders of Jabesh said to him “Give us seven days’ truce to send men through all the territory of Israel, and if there is no one who rescues us we will come out to you.”
4 And the messengers came to Gibeah of Saul and gave the message publicly, and all the people raised their voices and wept.
5 And in came Saul from the field, behind his oxen; and Saul said “What is the matter with the people that they are weeping?” and they recounted to him the story of the men of Jabesh.
6 And the spirit of Jehovah seized upon Saul when he heard this story, and he was very angry,
7 and took a yoke of oxen and cut them in pieces and sent the pieces through all the territory of Israel by messengers with the message “He who does not come out with Saul and Samuel shall have his oxen treated so.”
And the dread of Jehovah fell upon the people, and they came out like one man;
8 and he mustered them at Bezek, and there were three hundred thousand of the sons of Israel and thirty thousand of the men of Judah.
9 And they said to the messengers that had come “Say to the men of Jabesh in Gilead, Tomorrow you shall have help when the sun grows hot’”; and the messengers came and told the men of Jabesh, and they were glad.
10 And the men of Jabesh said “Tomorrow we will come out to you and you shall do with us just as you think best.”
11 But on the next day Saul arranged the men in three columns, and they came into the camp in the morning watch and killed ʽAmmonites till the day grew hot; and as for those who were left, they were scattered and there were not left among them two together.
12 And the people said to Samuel “Who was it that said ‘Shall Saul reign over us?’ give us those men to put to death.”
13 But Saul said “Nobody shall be put to death on this day; for today Jehovah has made victory in Israel.”
14 And Samuel said to the people “Come, let us go to the Gilgal and renew the kingship there”;
15 and all the people went to the Gilgal and made Saul king there before Jehovah at the Gilgal, and sacrificed welfare-sacrifices there before Jehovah; and Saul and all the men of Israel had a great rejoicing there.
12 And Samuel said to all Israel “Here I have obeyed you in everything that you said to me, and have established a king over you.
2 And now, here is the king going about before you, and I am old and gray-headed; and here are my sons among you; and I have been going about before you from my youth to this day.
3 Here I am: bring your charges against me in the presence of Jehovah and his anointed: whose bull have I taken, and whose donkey have I taken? and to whom have I denied justice, and whom have I persecuted? and from whom have I taken composition-money to blind my eyes with? and I will return it to you.”
4 And they said “You have never denied us justice nor persecuted us, nor taken anything from us.”
5 And he said to them “Jehovah is witness against you this day, and so is his anointed, that you have not found anything in my hands.”
And they said “He is.”
6 And Samuel said to the people “Jehovah, who made Moses and Aaron and who brought your fathers up from Egypt, is witness.
7 And now stand out and let me plead against you before Jehovah the case of all Jehovah’s fair dealing by you and by your fathers.
8 When Jacob had gone into Egypt, your fathers cried to Jehovah, and Jehovah sent Moses and Aaron and took your fathers out of Egypt and settled them in this place.
9 And they forgot their God Jehovah, and he sold them into the hands of Sisera the general of the army of Hasor and into the hands of the Philistines and into the hands of the king of Moab, and they made war on them.
10 And they cried to Jehovah, and said ‘We have sinned, because we have left Jehovah and worshiped the Baals and the ʽAshtarts: now deliver us out of the hands of our enemies, and we will worship you’;
11 and Jehovah sent Jerubbaal and Bedan and Jephthah and Samuel and delivered you out of the hands of your enemies on all sides, and you lived in security.
12 And you saw that King Nahash of the Bene-ʽAmmon had come against you, and you said to me ‘No, but let there be a king reigning over us’ when your God Jehovah was your king.
13 And now here is the king that you have chosen to have: here Jehovah has put a king over you.
14 If you fear Jehovah and worship him and listen to him, and do not disobey Jehovah, and both you and the king who has come to reign over you keep on the side of your God Jehovah,
15 but if you do not listen to Jehovah, and disobey Jehovah, then Jehovah’s hand will be upon you and upon your king to destroy you.
16 Stand out even now and see this great thing which Jehovah does before your eyes!
17 It is wheat harvest today, is it not?
I will call on Jehovah and he will give thunder and rain; so see for yourselves that what you have done in asking to have a king is a great wickedness of yours in Jehovah’s sight.”
18 And Samuel called on Jehovah, and Jehovah gave thunder and rain that day. And all the people were in great fear of Jehovah and of Samuel;
19 and all the people said to Samuel “Pray for your servants to your God Jehovah; do not let us die; for we have added a wickedness to all our sins in asking to have a king.”
20 And Samuel said to the people “Do not be afraid; you have done all this wickedness, but only do not turn aside from following Jehovah, and worship Jehovah with all your hearts,
21 and do not turn aside to follow the nonentities that do no good and deliver nobody because they are nonentities.
22 For Jehovah will not abandon his people, for the sake of his great name, because Jehovah has chosen to make you his own people.
23 For me too, away with the thought of my sinning against Jehovah by ceasing to pray for you; and I will guide you in the way of what is good and right.
24 Only fear Jehovah and worship him loyally with all your hearts; for see what great things he has done for you.
25 But if you do misbehave, both you and your king will be swept away.”
13:1-23
13 Saul was . . . years old when he became king,and for two years he reigned over Israel.
2 And Saul selected three thousand men out of Israel, and two thousand were with Saul at Micmas and in the highland of Bethel, and a thousand were with Jonathan at Gibeah in Benjamin; and the rest of the people he dismissed to their homes.
3 And Jonathan killed the prefect whom the Philistines had at Gibeah, and Saul blew the ram-horn throughout the country; and the Philistines heard the word “The Hebrews have revolted,”
4 and all Israel heard “Saul has killed the Philistines’ prefect, so Israel is at deadly feud with the Philistines,” and the people came out in arms behind Saul at the Gilgal.
5 And the Philistines came together to make war with Israel, three thousand chariots and six hundred cavalry and men in numbers like the sand on the seabeach, and came up and encamped at Micmas, east of Beth-Aven.
6 And the men of Israel saw that they were in straits, because the people were hard pushed; and the people hid in the caves and the briers and the cliffs and the burial-vaults and the cisterns,
7 and crossed the fords of the Jordan to the country of Gad and Gilead.
And Saul was still at the Gilgal; and the people were all dropping away from him in a panic.
8 And he waited seven days, in accordance with the appointment that Samuel had made; but Samuel did not come to the Gilgal, and the people were scattering away from him.
9 And Saul said “Bring the burnt-offering and the welfare-sacrifices to me,” and offered the burnt-offering.
10 And as he finished offering the burnt-offering, Samuel arrived, and Saul went out to meet him and salute him.
11 And Samuel said “What have you done?” and Saul said “Why, I saw that the people were scattered away from me, and you had not come within the appointed days, and the Philistines had come together at Micmas,
12 and I thought ‘Now the Philistines will be coming down to the Gilgal against me, and I have not propitiated Jehovah’; and I strained a point and offered the burnt-offering.”
13 And Samuel said to Saul “You did foolishly: you did not keep your God Jehovah’s commandment that he had given you.
For then Jehovah would have established your kingship over Israel forever;
14 but now your kingship shall not stand.
Jehovah has looked out for himself a man to his mind, and Jehovah has appointed him warden over his people, because you did not keep what Jehovah commanded you.”
15 And Samuel left the Gilgal and went his own way; but the rest of the people went up behind Saul to the front, and came from the Gilgal to Gibeah in Benjamin; and Saul mustered the men that he had with him, and found that there were about six hundred of them.
16 And Saul and his son Jonathan, and the men he had with him, were staying at Gebaʽ in Benjamin, and the Philistines were encamped at Micmas.
17 And the ravaging force went out from the Philistines’ camp in three columns, one column taking the direction of Ghophrah, toward the country of Shuʽal,
18 and one that of Beth-Horon, and one that of the boundary that looks down on Hyena Valley, toward the wilderness.
19 And there was not a smith to be found in all the country of Israel, because the Philistines had thought “The Hebrews might make swords and spears”;
20 and all Israel went down to the Philistines for sharpening a man’s plowshare and hoe and ax and goad-point,
21 and the charge for the smith’s work was two-thirds for plowshares and hoes and a third of a shekel for ax-whetting and for goad-shoeing.
22 And on the day of the battle of Micmas there were no swords and spears to be found in the hands of any of the people who were with Saul and Jonathan; but Saul and his son Jonathan had them.
23 And the Philistines’ supporting force went out to Micmas Crossing.
14:1-52
14 And one day Saul’s son Jonathan said to the young man who was squire to him “Come, let us go across to the Philistines’ force over yonder,” but did not tell his father.
2 Saul was staying in the outskirts of Gebaʽ, under the pomegranate-tree in Migron; the people with him amounted to about six hundred men,
3 and Ahijah, the son of Ahitub the brother of Icabod the son of Pinehas the son of ʽEli Jehovah’s priest at Shiloh, bearing an ephod; and the people did not know that Jonathan went.
4 And between the crossings, where Jonathan tried to go across to the Philistine force, there is a tooth of rock over on this side and a tooth of rock over on that side, one named Boses and the other named Seneh,
5 the one tooth towering up on the north, toward Micmas, and the other on the south, toward Gebaʽ.
6 And Jonathan said to the young man who was squire to him “Come, let us go across to those uncircumcised fellows’ supporting force; maybe Jehovah will do something for us, for Jehovah has no lack of power to give victory by many or by few”;
7 and his squire said to him “Do whatever you feel inclined to: I am with you, just as you feel.”
8 And Jonathan said “You see, we shall be going across to the men and exposing ourselves to their sight:
9 if they tell us ‘keep still till we get to you’ we will stand where we are and not go up to them;
10 but if they say ‘come up to us’ we will go up, because Jehovah will have given them into our hands, and this will be the token for us.”
11 And the two of them exposed themselves to the sight of the Philistine supporting force, and the Philistines said “There are some Hebrews coming out of the holes they were hiding themselves in”;
12 and the men of the supporting force answered Jonathan and his squire “Come up to us and we will let you know something.”
And Jonathan said to his squire “Come up behind me, because Jehovah has given them into Israel’s hands.”
13 And Jonathan climbed up on hands and feet, and his squire behind him; and they fell before Jonathan, while his squire finished killing them behind him.
14 And the first havoc that Jonathan and his squire made was about twenty men, in about half a furrow of a one-yoke plowing.
15 And there came a panic in the camp and in the field, among all the people in the supporting force; and the ravagers were panic-struck too, and would not work; and the earth quivered, and it became an unearthly panic.
16 And the sentinels Saul had at Gebaʽ in Benjamin saw how the uproar was surging back and forth;
17 and Saul said to the people who were with him “Look up the men and see who has left us”; and they looked up and found Jonathan and his squire missing.
18 And Saul said to Ahijah “Bring the ephod here”; for he was bearing the ephod before Israel that day.
19 And while Saul was speaking to the priest the uproar in the Philistine camp kept growing greater; and Saul said to the priest “Take your hand off,”
20 and Saul and all the people who were with him took the field. And they came to the battle and found it had come to be one man’s sword against another in utter anarchy.
21 And the Hebrews that had belonged to the Philistines as before, who had come up with them to the camp, also faced about to be with the Israelites who were with Saul and Jonathan;
22 and all the men of Israel that had been hiding in the highland of Ephraim heard that the Philistines had run, and they too dogged them with a running fight.
23 And Jehovah gave Israel the victory that day.
And the fighting went past Beth-Aven, 24 and all the people came to be with Saul, about ten thousand men, and the fighting spread out all over the highland of Ephraim.
And Saul laid a great interdict that day, and banned the people with the words “Cursed be the man who eats food till it is evening and I am revenged on my enemies”; and none of the people tasted food, but all the countryside fasted.
25 And there were combs of honey over the wilds;
26 and the people came to the combs and found that the bees had gone away from them; but there was no one that put his hand to his mouth, because the people were afraid of the oath.
27 But Jonathan had not heard when his father put the people to the oath; and he reached out the tip of a stick he had in his hand and dipped it into a comb of honey, and put his hand to his mouth, and his eyes brightened up.
28 And a man of the people answered “Your father has put the people to an oath ‘Cursed be the man who eats food today’; and the people have grown faint.”
29 And Jonathan said “My father has brought the country into trouble: see how my eyes brightened up when I tasted that little bit of honey;
30 what if the people had eaten out of the plunder they have got from the enemy? then there would have been plenty of Philistines killed.”
31 And they were killing Philistines that day from Micmas to Aijalon, and the people grew very faint;
32 and the people flew upon the plunder and took sheep and cows and calves and slaughtered them on the ground, and the people ate over the blood.
33 And they told Saul “There are the people sinning against Jehovah by eating over the blood”; and he said “You have dealt falsely; roll a big stone here to me.”
34 And Saul said “Scatter among the people and tell them to bring their bulls and sheep here to me and slaughter them here and eat them, and not sin against Jehovah by eating over the blood”; and all the people brought what they had and slaughtered it there.
35 And Saul built an altar to Jehovah: that was his first start in altar-building to Jehovah.
36 And Saul said “Let us go down after the Philistines by night and plunder among them till morning daylight, and not leave a man among them”; and they said “Do anything you think best.”
But the priest said “Let us approach God here.”
37 And Saul put the question to God “Shall I go down after the Philistines? will you give them into Israel’s hands?” but he did not answer him that day.
38 And Saul said “Come here, all the headmen of the people, and see for yourselves what the sin is in today;
39 for, by Jehovah who gives Israel the victory, be it in my son Jonathan, he shall die.”
40 And he said to all Israel “Be you one side and I and my son Jonathan will be one side”; and the people said to Saul “Do what you think best.”
41 And Saul said “Jehovah, God of Israel, why have you not answered your servant today? if this crime is in me or my son Jonathan, Jehovah, God of Israel, give Urim; and if this crime is in your people Israel, give Thummim.”
And Jonathan and Saul were fixed upon, and the people went clear.
42 And Saul said “Toss between me and my son Jonathan: whichever Jehovah fixes upon, let him die”; and the people said to Saul “This thing shall not be,” but Saul overbore the people and they tossed between him and his son Jonathan, and Jonathan was fixed upon.
43 And Saul said to Jonathan “Tell me what you have done”; and Jonathan told him, saying “Tasted a little honey with the tip of the stick I had in my hand: here I am, I will die.”
44 And Saul said “God do so, and more, but die you shall, Jonathan.”
45 But the people said to Saul “Jonathan die, who has won this great victory of Israel? away with the thought! by Jehovah, not a hair of his head shall fall to the ground, because he cooperated with God today.”
And the people ransomed Jonathan so that he did not die.
46 And Saul came up from following the Philistines, and the Philistines went home.
47 And Saul took the kingship over Israel, and made war round about on all his enemies, on Moab and on the Bene-ʽAmmon and on Edom and on the kings of Sobah and on the Philistines, and wherever he went he was victorious; and he built up a power.
48 And he defeated the ʽAmalekites and delivered Israel out of the hands of its pillagers.
49 And Saul’s sons were Jonathan and Ishbaal and Malkishuaʽ; and of his two daughters the older one’s name was Merab and the younger’s Mical;
50 and the name of Saul’s wife was Ahinoʽam the daughter of Ahimaʽas.
And his general’s name was Abner the son of Saul’s uncle Ner:
51 Saul’s father Kish and Abner’s father Ner were the sons of Abiel.
52 And there was hard fighting with the Philistines throughout Saul’s time; and as Saul saw any brave and stalwart man he took him into his service.
15:1-35
15 And Samuel said to Saul “I was the one whom Jehovah sent to anoint you king over his people Israel: now obey Jehovah’s words.
2 Says Jehovah of Armies, ‘I have taken up what the ʽAmalekites did to Israel, that they beset them on the way when they were coming up out of Egypt.
3 Now go and attack the ʽAmalekites and destroy without quarter all that belongs to them; have no mercy on them; put to death man and woman, child at play and baby at the breast, ox and sheep, camel and donkey.’”
4 And Saul summoned the people and mustered them at Telam, ten thousand infantry;
5 and Saul came to the capital of ʽAmalek and lay in ambush in the arroyo.
6 And Saul said to the Cainites “Go and move out from among the ʽAmalekites, that I may not sweep you away with them, you who befriended all the sons of Israel when they were coming up out of Egypt”; and the Cainites moved out from among the ʽAmalekites.
7 And Saul made havoc of the ʽAmalekites from Havilah till you come to Shur, east of Egypt,
8 and captured Agag, the king of the ʽAmalekites, alive, and massacred all the people without quarter.
9 But Saul and the people spared Agag and the best of the sheep and cattle, the fatlings and the he-lambs, and everything good, and would not destroy them; but all insignificant and undesirable articles they destroyed as deodand.
10 And Jehovah’s word came to Samuel,
11 “I am sorry I made Saul king; for he has turned back from following me, and has not acted on my words.”
And Samuel was shocked, and cried to Jehovah all night.
12 But the first thing in the morning Samuel started to meet Saul; and Samuel was told “Saul came to Carmel and went down to the Gilgal, and is erecting himself a monument”; and he turned and went across and down to the Gilgal to Saul, and found him offering a burnt-offering to Jehovah, the prime of the booty he had brought from the ʽAmalekites.
13 And Samuel came to Saul, and Saul said to him “Jehovah bless you; I have acted on Jehovah’s words.”
14 And Samuel said “Then what is this bleating that my ears are full of, and this mooing I hear?”
15 And Saul said “They brought them from the ʽAmalekites; for the people spared the best of the sheep and cattle for sacrificing to your God Jehovah; and the rest we destroyed.”
16 And Samuel said “Wait and let me tell you what Jehovah said to me last night.”
And he said “Say it.”
17 And Samuel said “If you do seem small to yourself, are you not head of the tribes of Israel? And Jehovah anointed you king over Israel,
18 and Jehovah sent you on an errand and said ‘Go and destroy the ʽAmalekite sinners without quarter, and fight them till you have exterminated them’:
19 why did you not obey Jehovah, but pounced on the booty and did what displeased Jehovah?”
20 And Saul said to Samuel “I did obey Jehovah, and went on the errand Jehovah sent me on, and brought Agag the king of the ʽAmalekites, and destroyed the ʽAmalekites without quarter;
21 but the people took out of the booty sheep and cattle, the prime of the deodand to sacrifice to your God Jehovah at the Gilgal.”
22 And Samuel said “Does Jehovah take as much pleasure in burnt-offerings and sacrifices as in obedience to Jehovah’s words?
Obedience is better than sacrifice, and listening than rams’ fat.
23 For disobedience is the sin of soothsaying, and pushing is fetish and teraphim.
Because you have rejected Jehovah’s word, he has rejected you as king.”
24 And Saul said to Samuel “I did wrong, in that I have violated Jehovah’s charge and your words, because I was afraid of the people and obeyed them.
25 But now pardon my sin and come back with me and let me do reverence to Jehovah.”
26 But Samuel said to Saul “I will not come back with you, because you have rejected Jehovah’s word and Jehovah has rejected you from being king over Israel”;
27 and Samuel turned to go. And Saul took hold of the flap of his robe, and it tore;
28 and Samuel said to him “Jehovah has torn the kingship of Israel off from you and given it to your better.
29 And the Continuance of Israel will not break his word nor change his mind; for he is not man, to change his mind.”
30 And he said “I did wrong.
Now pay honor to me before the elders of my people, and before Israel, and come back with me and let me do reverence to your God Jehovah.”
31 And Samuel followed Saul back, and Saul did reverence to Jehovah.
32 And Samuel said “Bring Agag the king of the Amalekites to me”; and Agag came to him tottering, and said “Death is bitter, bitter, after all.”
33 And Samuel said “As your sword has bereaved women of their children, so shall your mother be the most bereaved of women”; and Samuel cut Agag to pieces before Jehovah at the Gilgal.
34 And Samuel went to Ramah, and Saul went up to his home at Gibeath-Saul.
35 And Samuel never again saw Saul till the day of his death, because Samuel mourned over Saul and Jehovah repented of having made Saul king over Israel.
16:1-23
16 And Jehovah said to Samuel “How long will you keep mourning over Saul, when I have rejected him from reigning over Israel?
Fill your horn with oil and go, I will send you to Jesse the Bethlehemite; for I have picked out a king among his sons.”
2 And Samuel said “How am I to go?
Saul would hear of it and kill me.”
And Jehovah said “You are to take with you a heifer calf, and say ‘I have come to sacrifice to Jehovah,’
3 and invite Jesse to the sacrifice, and I will let you know what to do; and you are to anoint for me the one I tell you to.”
4 And Samuel did what Jehovah had said, and came to Bethlehem; and the elders of the city came to meet him in alarm, and said “Your coming means that all is well?”
5 and he said “It does; I have come to sacrifice to Jehovah; hallow yourselves and hold festival with me today”; and he hallowed Jesse and his sons and invited them to the sacrifice.
6 And when they came in and he saw Eliab, he thought “It must be Jehovah’s warden, his anointed”;
7 but Jehovah said to Samuel “Do not look at his appearance and his tallness, for I have rejected him; for it is not what man sees, for man sees by the eyes but Jehovah sees by the heart.”
8 And Jesse called Abinadab and had him pass before Samuel; and he said “Jehovah has not chosen this one either.”
9 And Jesse had Shammah pass; and he said “Jehovah has not chosen this one either.”
10 And Jesse had all seven of his sons pass before Samuel; and Samuel said to Jesse “Jehovah has not chosen these.”
11 And Samuel said to Jesse “Is this all there are of the boys?” and he said “There still remains the youngest: he is out shepherding.”
And Samuel said to Jesse “Send and get him; for we will not sit down till he is here.”
12 And he sent and brought him a ruddy, handsome-eyed, good-looking youth and Jehovah said “There, anoint him: this is the one.”
13 And Samuel took the horn of oil and anointed him in the midst of his brothers; and the spirit of Jehovah seized upon David from that day on.
And Samuel went off to Ramah.
14 And the spirit of Jehovah had gone away from Saul, and a bad spirit from Jehovah used to overwhelm him.
15 And Saul’s officers said to him “There is a bad divine spirit overwhelming you;
16 say the word, sir, your servants are before you, have them look up a man expert as a lyre-player, and when there is a bad divine spirit on you he shall play his music and you will be better.”
17 And Saul said to his officers “Pick me out a man who plays well and bring him to me.”
18 And one of the henchmen answered “I have seen a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite who is expert at playing, and a man of energy and a fighter, and discreet in word, and a fine figure, and Jehovah is with him.”
19 And Saul sent messengers to Jesse, and said “Send me your son David, the one who is with the sheep”;
20 and Jesse took a load of bread and a bag of wine and one kid and sent them to Saul by his son David.
21 And David came to Saul and presented himself before him, and Saul took a great liking to him and had him as squire.
22 And Saul sent word to Jesse “Let David be in my service, because I like him.”
23 And when there was a divine spirit on Saul David would take his lyre and play his music, and Saul would be easier and better, and the bad spirit would go away from him.
17:1-58
17 And the Philistines brought their armies together for war, and they met at Socoh, which belongs to Judah, and camped between Socoh and ʽAzekah, at Ephes-Dammim;
2 and Saul and the men of Israel came together and camped in Terebinth Vale, and offered battle to the Philistines,
3 the Philistines standing on the mountain on this side and the Israelites on the mountain on that side, with the valley between them.
4 And a man came out between them from the Philistine line of battle, named Goliath, from Gath; he was nine and a half feet tall,
5 and he had a bronze helmet on his head and wore a hauberk of scales, the hauberk weighing a hundred and eighty pounds of bronze,
6 and he had bronze greaves on his legs and a bronze javelin between his shoulders;
7 and the shaft of his spear was like a weaver’s pole, and the iron spearhead weighed twenty pounds, and his shield-carrier went in front of him.
8 And he stood and called out to the Israelite line of battle “Why have you come out to offer battle?
I am the Philistine, you are subjects of Saul, select a man to come down to me:
9 if he can fight me, and kills me, we will be subject to you; but if I overcome him and kill him, you shall be subject to us and behave as such.”
10 And the Philistine said “I this day flout Israel’s ranks: give me a man to fight with.”
11 And Saul and all the Israelites heard these words of the Philistine’s, and were dismayed and greatly afraid.
12 And David, the son of an Ephrathite (that is, from Bethlehem in Judah) whose name was Jesse, who had eight sons, and who was in Saul’s days an old man, advanced in years,
13 Jesse’s three oldest sons were gone to the war, following Saul; the names of his three sons who were gone to the war were Eliab the eldest, and Abinadab the second eldest, and Shammah the third;
14 David was the youngest, and the three oldest were gone to the war, following Saul,
15 David was gone, had gone back from Saul’s service to tend his father’s sheep at Bethlehem.
16 And the Philistine approached the first thing in the morning and again in the evening, and stood ready, forty days.
17 And Jesse said to his son David “Take this bushel of roasted grain for your brothers, and ten cakes of bread, and get them to your brothers at the camp quick;
18 and bring these ten cuts of curd to the captain of the thousand, and make sure how your brothers are doing, and get the token from them;
19 Saul and they, and all the men of Israel, are in Terebinth Vale, fighting the Philistines.”
20 And the first thing in the morning David left the sheep with a keeper and loaded himself up and went, as Jesse had ordered him; and he came to the cart-stand, and the force going out to form the line gave a cheer for the fighting;
21 and the Israelites and the Philistines formed their lines facing each other.
22 And David put down the things and left them with the supply-keeper, and ran to the front and came and asked how his brothers were doing.
23 And as he was talking with them, up came a man between the fronts out of the Philistine line, named Goliath the Philistine, from Gath, and spoke these words, and David heard him.
24 And all the men of Israel, when they saw the man, fled before him and were in great fear;
25 and the men of Israel said “Do you see this man that has come up? it is to flout Israel he has come up; and the king will make the man that kills him a very rich man and give him his daughter, and make his family free in Israel.”
26 And David said to the men that were standing with him “What will be done for the man who kills yonder Philistine and takes away the flout from Israel? for who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that he has flouted the ranks of a living God?”
27 And the people told him the same thing: “so it will be done for the man who kills him.”
28 And his oldest brother Eliab heard when he spoke to the men; and Eliab was angry at David, and said “What did you come down for, and whom did you leave those few sheep in the wilderness with?
I know your headstrongness and cantankerousness, that it was in order to see the fighting you came down.”
29 And David said “What have I been doing now? it was talk, wasn’t it?”
30 and went from beside him around to another section of the front, and said the same thing; and the people gave him the same answer as before.
31 But the things David was saying were overheard and reported before Saul; and he had him brought.
32 And David said to Saul “Do not be downhearted, sir; your servant will go and fight this Philistine.”
33 But Saul said to David “You cannot go against this Philistine to fight him, because you are a boy and he has been a fighting man from his boyhood up.”
34 But David said to Saul “Your servant was tending sheep for his father, and there would come a lion or a bear and carry off a sheep out of the flock,
35 and I would go out after it and beat it and recover the creature out of its mouth; and one would stand up against me and I would hold its mane and strike it dead.
36 Both the lion and the bear your servant killed, and this uncircumcised Philistine will be like one of them, because he has flouted the ranks of a living God.”
37 And David said “Jehovah, who brought me off safe from the lion and the bear, he will bring me off safe from this Philistine.”
And Saul said to David “Go, and Jehovah be with you.”
38 And Saul dressed David in his own brigandine and put a bronze helmet on his head,
39 and belted his own sword on David over his brigandine; and David had trouble in walking, because he had not practiced.
And David said to Saul “I cannot walk in these, because I have not practiced”; and they took them off him.
40 And he took his staff in his hand, and chose five pebbles out of the bed of the arroyo and put them in his shepherd’s wallet, his yalkut, and had his sling in his hand; and he approached the Philistine,
41 and the Philistine went on, drawing nearer and nearer to David, with the man that was his shield-carrier in front of him.
42 And the Philistine looked and saw David, and despised him because he was a boy, a ruddy youth and a beauty;
43 and the Philistine said to David “Am I a dog, that you are coming at me with staves?”
And the Philistine cursed David by his gods;
44 and the Philistine said to David “Come to me and have me give your flesh to the birds of the air and the beasts of the range.”
45 But David said to the Philistine “You are coming at me with sword and spear and javelin, but I am coming at you with the name of Jehovah of Armies, the God of Israel’s ranks which you have flouted.
46 This day Jehovah will put you into my hands, and I shall kill you and take off your head and give your corpse and the corpses of the Philistine army to the birds of the air and the wild beasts of the earth today, that all the land may know that Israel has a God:
47 that all this assembly may know that victory is not by sword and spear, but battle belongs to Jehovah, and he will give you into our hands.”
48 And when the Philistine stood up and came on, drawing nearer to David, David ran in haste toward the line of battle to meet the Philistine;
49 and David reached into his wallet and took a stone out of it and slung, and hit the Philistine in the forehead, and the stone sank into his forehead and he fell on his face on the ground;
50 and David outfought the Philistine with sling and stone, and struck the Philistine dead without having any sword in his hand.
51 And David ran and stood by the Philistine and took his sword and drew it from its sheath and finished killing him, cutting off his head with it; and the Philistines saw that their champion was dead, and they ran.
52 And the men of Israel and Judah started up and gave a cheer, and pursued the Philistines till you come to Gath and to the gates of ʽEkron; and the killed Philistines fell from the Shagharaim road to Gath and ʽEkron;
53 and the sons of Israel came back from chasing the Philistines, and pillaged their camp.
54 And David took the Philistine’s head and brought it to Jerusalem, and put his outfit in his tent.
55 And when Saul saw David go out to meet the Philistine he said to Abner, the general of the army, “Whose son is the boy, Abner?” and Abner said “By your life, king, I do not know.”
56 And the king said “Ask whose son the young fellow is yourself.”
57 And when David came back from killing the Philistine, Abner took him and brought him before the king with the Philistine’s head in his hand.
58 And Saul said to him “Whose son are you, boy?” and David said “Son to your servant Jesse the Bethlehemite.”
18:1-30
18 And when he had finished talking to Saul, Jonathan’s soul was tied fast to David’s, and Jonathan loved him as he loved himself.
2 And Saul took him that day and would not let him go back to his father’s house.
3 And Jonathan and David pledged themselves to each other, in the love that he had for him as he loved himself;
4 and Jonathan stripped off the robe he had on and gave it to David, and his brigandine, and even his sword and bow and belt.
5 And David went out on whatever missions Saul sent him on, and did well; and Saul set him over the soldiers, and it pleased all the people, and Saul’s officers too.
6 And when they came in, at David’s return from killing the Philistine, the women came out from all the cities of Israel for song and dances, to meet King Saul, with tambourines and festivity and triangles;
7 and the merrymaking women sang “Saul struck down his thousands, David his tens of thousands.”
8 And Saul was very angry, and regarded this as a bad thing, and said “They have given David tens of thousands and me the thousands; he has nothing left but the kingship”;
9 and Saul took to looking askance at David from that day on.
10 And on the next day a bad divine spirit seized upon Saul, and he fell under the power in the house, while David was playing his music as he did on any day;
11 and Saul had a spear in his hand. And Saul hurled the spear and thought “I will pin David to the wall,” but David dodged away from him, twice.
12 And Saul was afraid of David, because Jehovah was with him and had gone away from Saul;
13 and Saul removed him from his presence and appointed him captain over a thousand, and he went out and came in before the people.
14 And David did well on all his errands, and Jehovah was with him.
15 And Saul saw how very well he did, and he quailed before him;
16 but all Israel and Judah loved David, because he went out and came in before them.
17 And Saul said to David “Here is my oldest daughter Merab, I will give you her as wife only show yourself a man of energy, and fight Jehovah’s battles,” Saul’s thought being “Let it not be my hand that comes on him, but the hands of the Philistines.”
18 And David said to Saul “Who am I, and who are my sib (father’s clan), in Israel, that I should marry the princess?”
19 But when the time for giving Saul’s daughter Merab to David came, she had been given to ʽAdriel the Meholathite as wife.
20 And Saul’s daughter Mical fell in love with David; and they told Saul, and the thing suited him.
21 And Saul thought “I will give her to him and have her be a bait to trap him, and the hands of the Philistines come on him.”
And Saul said to David “On two conditions you shall marry the princess today.”
22 And Saul gave his officers the order “Tell David quietly ‘Here, the king likes you and all his officers love you now marry the princess.’”
23 And Saul’s officers said these things in conversation with David; but David said “Does it look to you like a simple thing to marry the princess, I being a poor and obscure man?”
24 And Saul’s officers reported to him “These were David’s words.”
25 And Saul said “Say to David ‘The king does not care for any purchase-money but a hundred Philistine foreskins, to get revenge on the king’s enemies,’” Saul’s plan being to have David fall by the hands of the Philistines.
26 And Saul’s officers reported these things; and the idea of marrying the princess suited David,
27 and David went off, he and his men, and killed two hundred of the Philistines, and David brought their foreskins and paid the king in full, to marry the princess; and Saul gave him his daughter Mical as wife.
28 And Saul saw and knew that Jehovah was with David; and Saul’s daughter Mical loved him.
29 And Saul was more and more afraid of David; and Saul became a persistent enemy to David.
30 And the captains of the Philistines came out; and as often as they came out David did better than any of Saul’s officers, and his name was held in high honor.
19:1-24
19 And Saul proposed to his son Jonathan and to all his officers that they should kill David.
2 But Saul’s son Jonathan liked David very much; and Jonathan told David “Saul, my father, is looking for a chance to kill you; now in the morning look out for yourself, stay in concealment and hide,
3 and I will go out and stand at my father’s side in the field where you are, and I will talk of you to my father, and see what there is, and tell you.”
4 And Jonathan spoke in David’s favor to his father Saul, and said to him “Take care not to do any wrong in the matter of David, sir, because he has done you no wrong and his deeds have been very good for you;
5 and he took his life in his hand and killed the Philistine, and Jehovah made a great victory for all Israel.
You saw it and were glad; and why should you do the wrong of shedding innocent blood, in putting David to death for nothing?”
6 And Saul listened to Jonathan, and Saul swore “By Jehovah, he shall not be put to death.”
7 And Jonathan called David, and Jonathan told him all these things, and Jonathan brought David to Saul and he was in his presence as he had formerly been.
8 And there was more of the war, and David went out and fought the Philistines and killed a great number of them, and they fled before him.
9 And there was a bad divine spirit on Saul while he was sitting in the house, spear in hand, and David was playing his music;
10 and Saul tried to pin David to the wall with the spear, but David got out of Saul’s way and he struck the spear into the wall; and David fled and made his escape.
11 And that night Saul sent scouts to David’s house to watch it, so as to put him to death in the morning; and David’s wife Mical told him “If you do not get your life into safety tonight you will be put to death tomorrow”;
12 and Mical let David down through the window, and off he went, and fled away and made his escape.
13 And Mical took the teraphim and put it in the bed, and put the goat’s-hair netting at its head, and covered it with the blanket.
14 And Saul sent messengers to get David; and she said “He is sick.”
15 And Saul sent the messengers to see David, with the commission “Bring him up to me in the bed to be put to death”;
16 and the messengers went in and found the teraphim in the bed and the goat’s-hair netting at its head.
17 And Saul said to Mical “What did you turn on me like that for, and let my enemy go so that he has made his escape?” and Mical said “It was he; he said to me ‘Let me go; do you want me to kill you?’”
18 And David fled away and made his escape, and came to Samuel at Ramah and told him everything that Saul had done to him; and he and Samuel went and lived at Nothab-Ramah;
19 and Saul was told “David is to be found at Nothab-Ramah.”
20 And Saul sent messengers to get David; and they saw the assemblage of prophets under the power and Samuel standing over them, and a divine spirit came upon Saul’s messengers and they too fell under the power.
21 And they told Saul, and he sent other messengers, and they too fell under the power; and Saul kept on and sent a third party of messengers, and so did they.
22 And Saul was angry, and he too went to Ramah, and came to the cistern of the threshing-floor on the scalp and asked “Where are Samuel and David?” and the man he asked said “You will find them at Nothab-Ramah.”
23 And he went there to Nothab-Ramah, and a divine spirit came upon him too, and he went along, under the power as he went, till he came to Nothab-Ramah;
24 and he too threw off his clothes and was under the power before Samuel, and fell down naked and lay so all that day and all night; this is why they say “Is Saul also among the prophets?”
20:1-42
20 And David fled away from Nothab-Ramah.
And he came and said in conversation with Jonathan “What have I done? what is my crime? what wrong have I done before your father, that he is hunting for my life?”
2 And he said to him “Away with the thought! you are not to die; why, my father does not do anything great or small without disclosing it to me, and how should my father conceal this thing from me? there is nothing to it.”
3 But David answered again “Your father knows perfectly well that you like me, and he thinks ‘Let Jonathan not know this, for fear he should be pained’; but, by Jehovah and by your life, I am just about a pace from death.”
4 And Jonathan said to David “What would you suggests? and I will do it for you.” 5 And David said to Jonathan “Here it is new moon tomorrow, and I should sit down with the king to eat: give me leave of absence, and I will conceal myself out on the range till the third evening.
6 If your father should miss me, say ‘David asked leave of me to run to his city Bethlehem, because all the clan has an annual sacrifice there.’
7 If he says ‘All right,’ your servant is safe; but if he is angry, be sure I am in for trouble from him,
8 and act a friend’s part by your servant (since you have taken your servant into a pledge in the name of Jehovah) and if there is crime in me, kill me yourself: what should you bring me to your father for?”
9 And Jonathan said “Away with the thought; if I do find that trouble is due to come upon you from my father, of course I will tell you of it.”
10 And David said to Jonathan “Who shall tell me if your father gives you a hard answer?”
11 And Jonathan said to David “Come out on the range”; and the two of them went out on the range.
12 And Jonathan said to David “Jehovah the God of Israel be witness: when I sound my father, right away tomorrow, and find that he is or is not well-disposed toward David, then I will send to you and give you notice.
13 Jehovah do so to Jonathan, and more, but if my father is thinking fit to do you mischief I will give you notice and send you off to go where good shall betide you.
And may Jehovah be with you as he has been with my father;
14 and if I should still be alive, I hope you will befriend me for Jehovah’s sake; and if I should be dead,
15 you will never cut off your friendship from my family, nor, when Jehovah cuts off David’s enemies each of them from the face of the earth,
16 Jonathan be cut off from alongside David’s family; and may Jehovah hold David’s enemies to account.”
17 And again Jonathan swore David, in the love that he had for him, because he loved him the same as himself.
18 And Jonathan said to David “Tomorrow it is new moon, and you will be missed because your seat will be vacant.
19 And the third day lie very low, and come to the place where you concealed yourself on the day of the affair, and sit down beside yonder mound;
20 and I will shoot roving arrows to one side of it, roving at a mark.
21 And I will send the boy and tell him ‘Go find the arrow’; if I say to the boy ‘Here, the arrow is this side of you; pick it up,’ come, because you are safe and there is nothing afoot, by Jehovah.
22 But if I say to the boy ‘There, the arrow is beyond you,’ go, because Jehovah has sent you away.
23 And as to the promise you and I have given, Jehovah is between you and me forever.”
24 And David concealed himself on the range; and new moon came, and the king sat down to his meal.
25 And the king sat in his place as usual, in the wall seat, and Jonathan was in front and Abner sat at Saul’s side, and David’s place was vacant.
26 And Saul said nothing that day, because he thought “He has had something happen; he is not clean because he has not purified himself.”
27 And on the day after the new moon, the second, David’s place was vacant, and Saul said to his son Jonathan “How comes it Jesse’s son did not come to the meal either yesterday or today?”
28 And Jonathan answered Saul “David got leave of me for a trip to Bethlehem,
29 and said ‘Give me leave of absence, because we have a clan sacrifice in the city, and here my brothers have summoned me; now please let me get off to see my brothers’; that is why he has not come to the king’s table.”
30 And Saul was angry at Jonathan and said to him “You son of disorderly girls, don’t I know you are associated with Jesse’s son to bring yourself to grief, yourself and your mother’s nakedness?
31 because just as long as Jesse’s son is alive above ground your kingship will not be secure.
Now send and fetch him to me, for his life is forfeit.”
32 And Jonathan answered his father Saul “What should he die for? what has he done?”
33 and Saul hurled his spear at him to kill him; and Jonathan knew his father was bound to put David to death.
34 And Jonathan rose from the table in anger, and ate no food the second day of the moon, because he was pained about David, because his father had insulted him.
35 And in the morning Jonathan went out on the range to keep his appointment with David, taking a small boy with him,
36 and said to his boy “Run and find the arrows I shoot.”
As the boy was running he shot an arrow to go beyond him;
37 and when the boy came to the place where the arrow Jonathan had shot was, Jonathan called after the boy “Why, the arrow is beyond you.”
38 And Jonathan called after the boy “Be quick, hurry up, don’t stand still”; and Jonathan’s boy picked up the arrow and brought it to his master,
39 the boy not knowing anything only Jonathan and David knew the idea.
40 And Jonathan gave his boy the equipment he had, and said “Go take it into the city”;
41 and the boy went in, and David stood up from beside the mound and threw himself down flat on his face and did reverence three times; and they kissed each other and wept for each other till broad day.
42 And Jonathan said to David “Go, and good betide you; and as to what we have both sworn in Jehovah’s name, Jehovah shall be between you and me, and between your descendants and mine, forever”; and David went away, and Jonathan went into the city.
21:1-15
21 And David came to Nob, to Priest Ahimelec; and Ahimelec came in alarm to meet David, and said to him “How comes it you are alone and nobody with you?”
2 And David said to Priest Ahimelec “The king gave me an order and said to me ‘Let nobody know anything of the matter that I am sending you on and have given you orders for’; and I have made an appointment with my men for such and such a place.
3 And now what have you on hand? give me half a dozen cakes of bread in my hand, or whatever there is.”
4 And the priest answered David “I have no everyday bread, but sacred bread there is, if the men have only kept themselves from womankind.”
5 And David answered the priest “O, but we are barred from womankind as we used to be; when I left, the men’s things were in a sacred condition though it was everyday business they were on how much more when today it is every way sacred!”
6 And the priest gave him sacred, because there was not any bread there except the showbread that had been removed from before Jehovah to put on hot bread on the day when it was taken.
7 And there was a man there that day who was one of Saul’s servants, detained before Jehovah; his name was Doeg the Edomite, the fighting man of Saul’s shepherds.
8 And David said to Ahimelec “And is there not in your hands here such a thing as a spear or a sword? because I did not take with me either my sword or my other things, since the king’s affair was urgent.”
9 And the priest said “The sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom you killed in Terebinth Vale there is that, wrapped in a cloak behind the ephod; if you would take that for yourself, take it; for there is no other on these premises but that.”
And David said “There is none like that; let me have it.”
10 And David rose and fled from Saul that day, and came to King Akish of Gath.
11 And Akish’s officers said to him “Why, this is David, the king of the country; the one of whom they sing in the dances ‘Saul has killed by the thousand, David by the ten-thousand.’”
12 And David took note of these words and became very much afraid of King Akish of Gath,
13 and pretended to them that his wits were unsettled, and drummed on the gates and let his saliva run down on his beard.
14 And Akish said to his officers “There, when you see an insane man, why do you bring him to me?
15 Am I short of lunatics, that you bring that fellow to play his insane tricks around me? is that creature to come into my house?”
22:1-23
22 And David went away from there, and escaped to the fastness of ʽAdullam; and his brothers and all his kin heard of it, and they went down and joined him there.
2 And every man who was in a desperate pinch, and every man who was involved in debt, and every man with a grievance, gathered around him, and he became chief over them; and there came to be about four hundred men with him.
3 And David went from there to Mispeh-Moab and said to the king of Moab “Let my father and mother come out and be among you till I know what God will do with me”;
4 and he brought them into the presence of the king of Moab, and they stayed with him all the time David was in the fastness.
5 But the prophet Gad said to David “You are not to stay in the fastness; go into the country of Judah”; and David went, and came into Hereth Badlands.
6 And Saul heard of it, because David and the men who were with him were well known.
And Saul was at Gibeah sitting under the tamarisk on the height, with his spear in his hand and all his officers standing by,
7 and Saul said to his officers who were standing by “Listen, Benjamites: is Jesse’s son going to give all of you fields and vineyards and make all of you captains over a thousand or over a hundred,
8 that all of you have conspired against me and there is nobody to give me notice when my son leagues with Jesse’s son, and there is nobody who aches for me and gives me notice when my son sets up my servant against me as an underhand enemy, as he is doing today?”
9 And Doeg the Edomite, who was standing by Saul’s officers, answered “I saw Jesse’s son come to Ahimelec the son of Ahitub at Nob,
10 and he put a question to Jehovah for him and gave him provisions, and gave him Goliath the Philistine’s sword.”
11 And the king sent to summon Priest Ahimelec the son of Ahitub and all his kin, the priests at Nob, and they all came to the king.
12 And Saul said “Listen, son of Ahitub”; and he said “Yes, sire.”
13 And Saul said to him “Why have you and Jesse’s son conspired against me, you giving him bread and a sword and putting a question to God for him, standing up against me as an underhand enemy, as you are doing today?”
14 And Ahimelec answered the king “And who among all your majesty’s officers is like David, enjoying your confidence and son-in-law to your majesty, and admitted to private audience, and honored in your house?
15 Have I begun today to put questions to Jehovah for him? away with the thought!
Your majesty must not charge anything against your servant or any of my kin, for your servant knows nothing of all this, nothing great or small.”
16 And the king said “You die, Ahimelec, you and all your kin.”
17 And the king said to the runners who stood by “Turn to and put the priests of Jehovah to death, because they too have been backing David, and because they knew he was in flight and did not give me notice”; but the king’s officers would not put out their hands to cut down”; the priests of Jehovah.
18 And the king said to Doeg “Turn to, yourself, and cut the priests down”; and Doeg the Edomite turned to and cut the priests down himself, and put to death that day eighty-five men who carried linen ephods;
19 and in Nob, the priests’ city, he massacred everybody without quarter, man and woman, child at play and baby at the breast, ox and donkey and sheep, without quarter.
20 And one son of Ahimelec the son of Ahitub, named Abiathar, escaped, and fled away to follow David.
21 And Abiathar told David that Saul had killed the priests of Jehovah;
22 and David said to Abiathar “I knew that day that Doeg the Edomite was there, that he would be telling Saul; I have turned to to kill every soul of your family.
23 Stay with me, do not be afraid, because the one who is hunting for your life is the one who is hunting for mine; for you are in safe-keeping with me.”
23:1-29
23 And they told David “Here are the Philistines making war on Keilah, pillaging the threshing-floors.”
2 And David put the question to Jehovah “Shall I go and strike these Philistines?” and Jehovah said to David “Go and strike the Philistines and save Keilah.”
3 And David’s men said to him “We are in fear right here in Judah how much worse it will be when we go to Keilah against the Philistine line of battle!”
4 And again David put the question to Jehovah, and Jehovah answered him “Go right down to Keilah, for I am giving the Philistines into your hands.”
5 And David and his men went to Keilah and made war on the Philistines and drove their cattle, and killed a great number of them; and David saved the inhabitants of Keilah.
6 And when Abiathar the son of Ahimelec had fled to David to Keilah, an ephod had come down in his hand;
7 and Saul was told that David had gone into Keilah, and Saul said “God has put him into my hands, since he has shut himself in, going into a city with gates and bars,”
8 and Saul summoned all the people to war, to go down to Keilah to besiege David and his men;
9 and David learned that it was against him Saul was brewing mischief, and said to Priest Abiathar “Bring the ephod.”
10 And David said “Jehovah, God of Israel, your servant hears that Saul is trying to come to Keilah to destroy the city on my account.
11 Will the burghers of Keilah give me up to him? will Saul come down as your servant has heard?
Jehovah, God of Israel, tell your servant.”
12 And Jehovah said “He will.”
And David said “Will the burghers of Keilah give me and my men up to Saul?” and Jehovah said “They will.”
13 And David and his men, about six hundred strong, left Keilah and went where they happened to; and Saul was told that David had escaped from Keilah, and he gave up going out.
14 And David lived in the wilderness, in the fastnesses.And he lived in the highland, in the wilderness of Ziph; and Saul was looking for him all the time, but God did not give him into his hands;
15 and David was afraid because Saul had come out to hunt for his life. And David was in the wilderness of Ziph at Horeshah,
16 and Jonathan the son of Saul went off to Horeshah to David and encouraged him in the name of God,
17 and said to him “Do not be afraid, Saul my father will not get his hands on you; you will reign over Israel and I shall be second to you; Saul my father knows himself it is so.”
18 And the two of them pledged themselves to each other before Jehovah; and David remained at Horeshah, and Jonathan went home.
19 And the Ziphites came up to Saul at Gibeah, saying “David is keeping himself concealed in our country in the fastnesses at Horeshah, on the sides of Hakilah Hill south of the Jeshimon;
20 so now at your pleasure to come down, your majesty, come down, and it shall be our part to put him into your majesty’s hands.”
21 And Saul said “Jehovah bless you that you had mercy on me!
22 Go get more preparations made, and look and make sure of the place for him, where his feet will be hampered for they tell me he does play the slyest tricks
23 look and make sure of any of the lurking-places where he hides, and come back to me at Nacon, and I will go with you: if he is in the country, I will hunt him out among all the thousands of Judah.”
24 And they came away and went to Ziph before Saul; and David and his men were in the wilderness of Maon, in the Rift Valley, south of the Jeshimon.
25 And Saul and his men went to look for him; and they told David, and he went down to the cliffs and lived in the wilderness of Maon.
26 And Saul heard of it, and pursued David into the wilderness of Maon; and Saul went on this side of a mountain and David and his men on that side.
And as David was going in headlong haste to get away from Saul, and Saul and his men were hemming David and his men in to capture them,
27 a messenger came to Saul to say “Come quick, because the Philistines have raided the country”;
28 and Saul turned back from pursuing David, and went to face the Philistines.
Because of this they call that place Division Cliff.
29 And David went up from there and lived in the fastnesses of ʽEn-Gedi.
24:1-22
24 And when Saul came back from pursuing the Philistines they told him “David is in the wilderness of ʽEn-Gedi.”
2 And Saul took three thousand picked men out of all Israel and went to look for David and his men along the Ibex Rocks,
3 and came to the sheepfolds by the roadside. There there was a cave, and Saul went in to ease himself; and David and his men were at the back of the cave sitting down.
4 And David’s men said to him “Here is the day of which Jehovah said to you ‘I am giving your enemy into your hands, and you shall do with him as you think best.’”
And David rose and cut off the flap of Saul’s robe quietly;
5 but after that David’s conscience pricked him for having cut off the flap of Saul’s robe,
6 and he said to his men “Jehovah forbid the thought of my doing such a thing to my sovereign, Jehovah’s anointed, as to lay hands on him, because he is Jehovah’s anointed.”
7 And David reprimanded his men and would not let them rise to attack Saul; and Saul rose and left the cave and went along the road.
8 And after that David rose and went out of the cave and called after Saul “Your majesty!” and Saul looked back, and David bowed his face to the ground and did reverence.
9 And David said to Saul “Why do you listen to men’s words ‘David is looking for a chance to injure you’?
10 This day you have seen with your own eyes how Jehovah gave you into my hands today in the cave, and I refused to kill you, but spared you and said ‘I will not lay hands on my sovereign, because he is Jehovah’s anointed and my father.’
11 Yes, see the flap of your robe in my hands! for by my cutting off the flap of your robe and not killing you you may see for yourself that I have no fault or offense upon my hands, and have not misconducted myself toward you; but you are trying to take my life.
12 Jehovah shall give judgment between us, and Jehovah shall avenge me on you; but my hands shall not be laid on you.
13 As the proverb of the ancients says, knavery comes from knaves; but my hands shall not be laid on you.
14 Whom has the king of Israel come out against? whom are you pursuing? a dead dog, a single flea.
15 And Jehovah shall be arbiter, and give judgment between us, and uphold my rights and give me justice against you.”
16 And when David finished saying these things to Saul, Saul said “Is that your voice, son David?” and Saul wept aloud,
17 and said to David “You are more honest than I, because you have done good to me and I harm to you;
18 and it is a great good deed you have done to me today, that Jehovah put me into your hands and you did not kill me.
19 When a man finds his enemy and lets him go unmolested Jehovah will repay you with good for this day, what you have done to me.
20 And now, I know you are to be king and the kingship over Israel is to stand permanently in your hands:
21 now swear to me by Jehovah that you will not cut off my descendants after me and that you will not root out my name out of my family”;
22 and David swore to Saul.
And Saul went home, and David and his men went up to the fastness.
25:1-44
25 And Samuel died, and all Israel gathered and wailed for him and buried him at his home in Ramah.
And David moved, going down to the wilderness of Paran.
2 And there was a man at Maon whose ranch was at Carmel: the man was very wealthy, had three thousand sheep and a thousand goats; and he was having a sheepshearing at Carmel.
3 The man’s name was Nabal, and his wife’s Abigail; the wife was beautiful and sensible, the husband harsh and ill-conditioned; he was a Calebite.
4 And David heard in the wilderness that Nabal was shearing his sheep;
5 and David sent ten young men, and David said to the young men “Go up to Carmel, and when you come to Nabal’s ask him in my name how he does,
6 and say ‘So may you live, yourself well and your family well and all that is yours well.
7 Now I have heard that you are having a shearing: now those shepherds of yours have been with us, and we did not bully them, and nothing of theirs was missing all the time they were at Carmel.
8 Ask your men and have them tell you, that my men may have your goodwill, since we have come on a happy day; please give what you can to your servants, and to your son David.’”
9 And David’s men came and said to Nabal in David’s name all these words, and rested.
10 And Nabal answered David’s followers “Who is David, and who is Jesse’s son? there are too many slaves today that are turning brigands by their masters’ fault.
11 And am I to take my bread and my wine, and my meat that I have slaughtered for my shearers, and give them to men from I don’t know where?”
12 And David’s men turned and went their way, and came back and told him all these words.
13 And David said to his men “Belt on your swords”; and they belted on their swords, and David too belted on his, and about four hundred men went up behind David, while two hundred stayed with the things.
14 And one of Nabal’s men told Nabal’s wife Abigail “Here has David sent men out of the wilderness to congratulate master, and he jawed them.
15 But the men were very good to us, and we were not bullied, and did not miss anything, all the time we were going with them while we were out on the range:
16 they were a wall for us both night and day all the time we were with them tending the sheep.
17 Now make up your mind what you will do; for master and all his family are in for trouble, and he is too much of a reprobate to speak to.”
18 And in haste Abigail took two hundred cakes of bread and two skins of wine and five cooked sheep and seven pecks of roasted grain and a hundred clusters of raisins and a hundred cakes of figs, and put them on donkeys
19 and said to her men “Go over ahead of me: I will be coming after you”; but she did not tell her husband Nabal.
20 And as she was riding on her donkey and going down screened by the mountainside, she found David and his men coming down to meet her;
21 and she met with them while David was thinking “It is all for nothing I have guarded in the wilderness everything that belonged to this man, and of all that belonged to him nothing was missing: he has repaid me bad for good.
22 God do so to David’s enemies, and more, if by morning I leave of all that belongs to him any male person.”
23 And Abigail saw David and dismounted from her donkey in haste, and threw herself down on her face before David and did reverence on the ground,
24 and threw herself on his feet and said “On me be the offense, sir; but let your servant speak in your hearing, and listen to your servant’s words.
25 You must not mind that reprobate Nabal, sir, because he is just like his name: Nabal means curmudgeon, and curmudgeonliness is his nature; but I your servant did not see the young men you sent, sir.
26 And now, sir, by Jehovah and by your life, Jehovah has restrained you from getting into bloodguilt and from letting your own hands relieve you: now may your enemies, and those who wish my lord ill, be as Nabal is.
27 Now, then, let this token of goodwill that your servant has brought to my lord be given to the young men who accompany my lord in his movements.
28 Pardon your servant’s crime; for Jehovah will make my lord a secure house, because my lord is fighting Jehovah’s battles and there is nothing bad in your record as long as you have lived.
29 And men have stood up against you to persecute you and hunt for your life, but my lord’s life shall be wrapped up in the bundle of the living in the keeping of your God Jehovah, and your enemies’ lives he shall sling out in the cup of a sling.
30 And when Jehovah does for my lord just as he has promised you good, and appoints you warden over Israel,
31 my lord will not have this as a matter for misgiving and unrest, to have shed blood without cause and to have let my lord’s own hands relieve him; and Jehovah will do you good, and you will remember your servant.”
32 And David said to Abigail “Blessed be Jehovah the God of Israel, who sent you to meet me today;
33 and blessed be your good sense, and blessed you, who have checked me this day from getting into bloodguilt and from letting my own hands relieve me.
34 But, by Jehovah the God of Israel, who has restrained me from doing you harm, if you had not been quick about coming to meet me, by morning not a male person of Nabal’s would have been left.”
35 And David took from her hands what she had brought him; and to her he said “Go up to your home, it will be all right: see, I have obeyed you and favored you.”
36 And Abigail came home to Nabal and found him having in his house a wassail like the king’s; and Nabal was jolly and very drunk; and she did not tell him a thing, great or small, till the morning light.
37 But in the morning, when the wine had gone out of Nabal, his wife told him these things; and his heart died in him, and he turned to a stone.
38 And in about ten days Jehovah smote Nabal, and he died;
39 and David heard that Nabal was dead, and he said “Blessed be Jehovah, who has upheld my rights against Nabal in the matter of the insult I suffered, and who held back his servant from mischief and sent Nabal’s mischief back on his own head.”
And David sent a proposal of marriage to Abigail;
40 and David’s servants came to Abigail at Carmel and addressed her, saying “David sent us to you to get you for his wife.”
41 And she stood up and did reverence with her face to the ground, and said “Your servant is a waiting-maid to wash the feet of my lord’s servants”;
42 and Abigail set out at once, riding on her donkey, with her five maids going behind her, and followed David’s messengers and became his wife.
43 David took Ahinoʽam of Jezreʽel too; and they both became his wives.
44 But Saul had given his daughter Mical, David’s wife, to Palti the son of Layish, of Gallim.
26:1-25
26 And the Ziphites came to Saul at Gibeah, saying “David is keeping himself concealed on the sides of Hakilah Hill, in front of the Jeshimon; 2 and down went Saul to the wilderness of Ziph, and three thousand men with him, the picked men of Israel, to look for David in the wilderness of Ziph;
3 and Saul camped on the side of Hakilah Hill, in front of the Jeshimon, by the roadside; and David was living in the wilderness, and saw that Saul had come to the wilderness after him.
4 And David sent out scouts and learned that Saul had come to Nacon;
5 and David went off and came to the place where Saul was camped. And David saw the place where Saul and his general Abner the son of Ner were lying: Saul was lying in the cart-stand, and the people were camped around him.
6 And David spoke up and said to Ahimelec the Hittite and Serujah’s son Abishai, Joab’s brother, “Who will go down with me to Saul in the camp?” and Abishai said “I will go down with you.”
7 And David and Abishai came to the people in the night, and found Saul lying asleep in the cart-stand with his spear sticking in the ground at his head, and Abner and the people lying around him.
8 And Abishai said to David “God has put your enemy into your hands today; now let me pin him to the ground with his own spear at one stroke, and not give him a second.”
9 But David said to Abishai “Do him no violence; for who can lay hands on Jehovah’s anointed and go unpunished?”
10 And David said “By Jehovah, but Jehovah shall smite him, or his day shall come and he shall die, or he shall go down to a battle and meet his end.
11 Jehovah forbid the thought of my laying hands on Jehovah’s anointed; now take the spear at his head and the jug of water and let us get away.”
12 And David took the spear and the jug of water at Saul’s head, and they made their way out, without anybody’s seeing them or knowing of it or waking up, because a trance from Jehovah had fallen on them.
13 And David went over to the other side, and stood a long way off on the top of the mountain, with a great distance between;
14 and David called out to the people and to Abner “Hallo there, Abner!” and Abner answered “Who are you, calling out to the king?”
15 And David said to Abner “You are a man that is a man, are you, and nobody equal to you in Israel? and why did you not guard his majesty? because one of the people has been in to do violence to his majesty;
16 this is not a good record you have made.
By Jehovah, you are candidates for death for not having guarded your sovereign, Jehovah’s, anointed.
Now see where the king’s spear is, and the jug of water that was at his head.”
17 And Saul recognized David’s voice, and said “Is that your voice, son David?” and David said “It is, your majesty.”
18 And he said “What is your majesty pursuing his servant for? what have I done, and what fault is there upon my hands?
19 Now, your majesty, listen to your servant’s words: if Jehovah has set you on against me, let him accept an offering; but if it is men, cursed be they before Jehovah, because they have banished me from being connected with Jehovah’s, estate, as much as to say ‘Go worship other gods.’
20 Now may my blood not fall from Jehovah’s presence to the earth; for the king of Israel has come out to seek my life as a hawk chases a partridge on the mountains.”
21 And Saul said “I did wrong; come back, son David, for I will do you no more harm, seeing that you valued my life this day; I acted foolishly, I was very deluded indeed.”
22 And David answered “Here is the king’s spear for one of the men to come over and get;
23 and Jehovah will repay each man his honesty and loyalty, when Jehovah gave you into my hands today and I would not lay hands on Jehovah’s anointed.
24 And, as I thought much of your life this day, so may Jehovah think much of mine, and deliver me out of all distress.”
25 And Saul said to David “Bless you, son David: do you shall and achieve you shall.”
And David went on his way, and Saul back to his place.
27:1-12
27 And David said to himself “Now I shall come to my end at Saul’s hands someday or other: there is nothing for it but to escape to the Philistine country and have Saul despair of getting me by looking for me any longer in all the territory of Israel, and so escape out of his hands”;
2 and over went David, he and six hundred men who were with him, to Akish the son of Maʽoc, the king of Gath.
3 And David lived at Gath with Akish, he and his men and their families, David with his two wives Ahinoʽam the Jezreʽelite and Abigail the widow of Nabal the Carmelite;
4 and Saul was told that David had fled away to Gath, and he no longer looked for him.
5 And David said to Akish “Please let them give me a place to live in in one of the cities on the wolds: why should your servant live at the capital with you?”
6 And Akish that day gave him Siklag; so Siklag has belonged to the kings of Judah to this day.
7 And the length of time that David lived in the Philistine countryside was a year and four months.
8 And David and his men went up and raided the Geshurites and the ʽAmalekites (for those were the primitive populations of the country as you come to Shur and down to Egypt);
9 and David would devastate the country, and not leave alive man or woman, and take flocks and herds and donkeys and camels and clothing. And he came back and came to Akish,
10 and Akish said “Where did you raid today?” and David said “Against the Judahite South and the Jerahmeelite South and the Cainite South.”
11 And David would leave not a man or woman alive to bring to Gath, “for fear they should tell on us.”
So David did, and such was his custom, all the time he lived in the Philistine countryside.
12 And Akish had confidence in David, thinking “He has given mortal offense to his people Israel, and will be my subject always.”
28:1-25
28 And in those days the Philistines gathered their armies for a campaign, to attack Israel; and Akish said to David “Understand that you go out with me in the army, you and your men.”
2 And David said to Akish “So you shall know for yourself what your servant does”; and Akish said to David “So I will appoint you my permanent lifeguard.”
3 And Samuel had died, and all Israel had wailed for him and buried him in his city Ramah.
And Saul had expelled from the country all the spirit-mediums of different kinds.
4 And the Philistines gathered and came and encamped at Shunem; and Saul gathered all Israel, and they encamped at Gilboaʽ.
5 And Saul saw the Philistine army, and was afraid and utterly unnerved;
6 and Saul put questions to Jehovah, but Jehovah did not answer him either by dreams or by the Urim or by the prophets.
7 And Saul said to his officers “Look me up a medium that I can go to and inquire of her”; and his officers said to him “There is a medium to be found at ʽEn-Dor.”
8 And Saul disguised himself and put on different clothes, and went, he and two men with him, and came to the woman in the night and said “Use your power as medium for me, and bring me up the one I tell you to.”
9 But the woman said to him “Now you know what Saul did, how he extirpated the different kinds of mediums out of the country, and why are you shooting at my life?”
10 But Saul swore to her by Jehovah, “As Jehovah lives, you shall not suffer for this matter”;
11 and the woman said “Whom shall I bring up for you?” and he said “Bring me up Samuel.”
12 And the woman saw Samuel, and gave a loud cry and said “Why did you deceive me, when you are Saul?”
13 And the king said to her “Do not be afraid; but what did you see?” and she said to him “I saw a god coming up out of the earth.”
14 And he said to her “What did he look like?” and she said “An old man is coming up, wrapped in a robe”; and Saul knew it was Samuel, and bowed his face to the ground and did reverence.
15 And Samuel said to Saul “Why have you disturbed me with bringing me up?” and Saul said “I am in a very hard case, with the Philistines making war on me and God gone away from me and not answering me any longer either through the prophets or by dreams; and I have called you to let me know what to do.”
16 But Samuel said “And why should you ask me, when Jehovah has gone away from you and become your enemy?
17 And Jehovah has done as he said by me he would, and torn the kingship out of your hands and given it to a rival of yours, David.
18 As you did not obey Jehovah and wreak his anger on the ʽAmalekites, therefore Jehovah has done this thing to you this day;
19 and Jehovah has also given Israel with you into the Philistines’ hands.
And tomorrow you and your sons shall be with me; the army of Israel too Jehovah will give into the Philistines’ hands.”
20 And Saul was dumbfounded, and fell full length on the ground, and was greatly afraid at Samuel’s words; he had no strength in him either, because he had not eaten food all day and all night.
21 And the woman came to Saul and saw that he was in utter consternation; and she said to him “Here your servant has obeyed you, I have taken my life in my hand and listened to the things you proposed to me;
22 now take your turn to obey your servant, and let me set a bit of bread before you, and eat something so as to have some strength in you when you go on your way”;
23 but he refused, and said “I will not eat.”
But his servants urged him, and so did the woman; and he obeyed them, and rose from the ground and sat down on the bed.
24 And the woman, who had a tied-up calf in the house, killed it in haste and took meal and kneaded it up and baked it into matzoth,
25 and presented it before Saul and his servants, and they ate, and went off that night.
29:1-11
29 And the Philistines gathered all their armies to Aphek, while the Israelites were encamped at the spring in Jezreʽel.
2 And the Sarns of the Philistines were passing in review by hundreds and by thousands, and David and his men passing in the rear with Akish;
3 and the captains of the Philistines said “What do these Hebrews mean?”
And Akish said to the captains of the Philistines “Why, this is David, King Saul of Israel’s officer, who has been with me this year or two, and I have never had any fault to find with him from the day he transferred his allegiance to me till this day.”
4 But the captains of the Philistines were incensed, and said to him “Have the man go back, back to his place where you stationed him, and not down with us into the battle, and we shall not have him for an antagonist in the battle.
And what should the fellow pacify his sovereign with? would it not be with those men’s heads?
5 Why, this is the David of whom they sing in the dances ‘Saul has killed by the thousand, David by the ten-thousand.’”
6 And Akish called David and said to him “By Jehovah, I think you are all right, and I should like to have you go in and out with me in the army, because I have found nothing wrong with you from the day you came to me till this day; but the Sarns do not like you.
7 Now go back in friendship, and do not displease the Sarns of the Philistines.”
8 And David said to Akish “But what have I done, and what fault have you had to find with your servant from the first day I was with you till this day, that I am not to come and fight your majesty’s enemies?”
9 And Akish answered David “I know I think you are all right, right as a god’s angel; only the captains of the Philistines have said ‘he shall not go up with us into the battle.’
10 Now, the first thing in the morning, you and your sovereign’s subjects that came with you go to the place where I stationed you, and do not take anything vicious into your head, because you stand all right with me; go the first thing in the morning, as soon as you have light.”
11 And the first thing in the morning David went off, he and his men, to go back to the Philistine country; and the Philistines went up to Jezreʽel.
30:1-31
30 And when David and his men came to Siklag on the third day, the ʽAmalekites had raided the South and Siklag, and had sacked Siklag and burned it down,
2 and carried off the women and everybody in it, great and small; they did not kill anybody; and they herded them up and went on their way.
3 And David and his men came to the city and found it burned down and their wives and children carried off;
4 and David and the people he had with him raised their voices and wept till there was no longer any power to weep in them.
5 And David’s two wives were carried off, Ahinoʽam the Jezreʽelite and Abigail the widow of Nabal the Carmelite.
6 And David was in a very hard case, because the people were proposing to stone him, because all the people were furious over their children.
But David took courage in his God Jehovah.
7 And David said to Priest Abiathar the son of Ahimelec “Bring the ephod for me.”
8 And David put the question to Jehovah “Shall I pursue these raiders? should I catch them?” and he said to him “Do: catch you shall and rescue you shall.”
9 And David went, he and six hundred men who were with him, and they came to Besor Arroyo; and he left two hundred men there,
10 and he pressed on the pursuit, he and four hundred men; and two hundred men stayed, who were too dead to cross Besor Arroyo.
11 And they found an Egyptian out on the range and took him to David, and gave him food, which he ate, and water to drink;
12 and they gave him a cake of figs and two or three clusters of raisins, and he ate and his spirit came back to him for he had not eaten food nor drunk water for three days and three nights.
13 And David said to him “Whom do you belong to, and where are you from?” and he said “I am an Egyptian boy, slave to an ʽAmalekite man, and my master left me behind because I was taken sick three days ago.
14 We had raided the Cretan South and the Judahite and the Calebite, and Siklag we had burned down.”
15 And David said to him “Will you take me down to these raiders?” and he said “Swear to me by God that you will not put me to death nor give me up to my master, and I will take you down to these raiders.”
16 And so he did; and they found them all over the ground at random, eating and drinking and holidaying with all the immense booty that they had taken from the Philistine country and the country of Judah.
17 And David killed them from twilight to dark and gave no quarter: not a man of them escaped except four hundred young men who mounted camels and made off.
18 And David rescued everything that the ʽAmalekites had taken; and David rescued his two wives;
19 and nothing of theirs was gone, from the smallest thing to the greatest and to sons and daughters, and from booty to everything that had been taken from them: David recovered everything.
20 And he took all the sheep and cows, and they drove them before him and said “This is David’s booty.”
21 And David came to the two hundred men that had been too dead to follow David, and whom he had had stay at Besor Arroyo; and they came out to meet David and the people he had with him, and came up to the people and asked how they had got on.
22 And all the good-for-nothing reprobates among the men who had gone with David answered “Since they did not go with us, we will not give them any of the booty we have recovered except each man’s wife and children: they may take that drove along and go.”
23 But David said “You shall not do so, brothers, with what Jehovah has given to us and kept us safe and given into our hands the raiders that had come against us.
24 And who would listen to you on this proposition? for the share of the one who goes down to the fight is equal to the share of the one who stays with the things: they are to share together.”
25 And thenceforth he made it a usage and a law for Israel to this day.
26 And David, coming to Siklag, sent parts of the booty to his friends the elders of Judah, with the message “Here is a token for you out of the booty from Jehovah’s enemies”:
27 to those in Bethul and those in Ramoth-Negeb and those in Jattir
28 and those in ʽArʽarah and those in Siphmoth and those in Eshtemoaʽ
29 and those in Racal and those in the Jerahmeelite cities and those in the Cainite cities
30 and those in Hormah and those in BorʽAshan and those in ʽAthac
31 and those in Hebron and to all the places where David had roved, he and his men.
31:1-13
31 And the Philistines fought the Israelites, and the men of Israel ran before the Philistines, and fell stabbed through on Mount Gilboaʽ.
2 And the Philistines kept close after Saul and his sons; and the Philistines killed Saul’s sons Jonathan and Abinadab and Malk-Shuaʽ.
3 And the onslaught on Saul was fierce, and the shooters (bowmen) hit him, and he was badly hurt by the shooters.
4 And Saul said to his squire “Draw your sword and run me through with it, for fear those uncircumcised fellows should come and amuse themselves with me”; but his squire would not, because he was too much afraid.
But Saul took his sword and threw himself on it;
5 and his squire saw that Saul was dead, and he too threw himself on his own sword and died with him.
6 And Saul and his three sons and his squire died on that day.
7 And the men of Israel on the other side of the Vale and of the Jordan saw that the men of Israel had fled and that Saul and his sons were dead, and they left their cities and fled, and the Philistines came and lived in the cities.
8 And on the next day the Philistines came to strip the killed, and found Saul and his three sons fallen on Mount Gilboaʽ.
9 And they cut off his head and stripped off his equipment and sent them around through the Philistine country to bring the news to their idols and the people,
10 and put his equipment in the temple of ʽAshtart; and his body they pegged to the wall of Beth-Shan.
11 And Jabesh in Gilead heard what the Philistines had done to Saul;
12 and all the bravest men set out and made an all-night march and took the bodies of Saul and his sons from the wall of Beth-Shan and brought them to Jabesh and burned them there,
13 and took their bones and buried them under the tamarisk tree at Jabesh, and fasted seven days.
2 Samuel
1 And after Saul’s death David, coming back from defeating the ʽAmalekites, stayed at Siklag two days.
2 And on the third day in came a man from the army, from Saul, with his clothes torn and earth on his head; and on coming to David he threw himself down on the ground and did him reverence.
3 And David said to him “Where do you come from?” and he told him “From the Israelite army; I am one that got away.”
4 And David said to him “What was it that happened? tell me.”
And he said that the people had been routed in the battle, and that many of the people had fallen and were dead; and that Saul and his sons were dead.
5 And David said to the young man who brought him the report “How do you know that Saul and his son Jonathan are dead?”
6 And the young man who brought the report said “I happened by chance to be on Mount Gilboaʽ, and found Saul supporting himself on his spear, and the chariotry and cavalry overtaking him;
7 and he turned and looked behind him and saw me, and called to me, and I said ‘Here I am’;
8 and he said to me ‘Who are you?’ and I said to him ‘I am an ʽAmalekite.’
9 And he said to me ‘Come and stand over me and give me my death; for I have been taken with dizziness while my life was still all in me.’
10 So I stood, over him and gave him his death for I knew he could not live after he had fallen and took the diadem that was on his head and an armlet that was on his arm, and brought them to your highness.”
11 And David took hold of his clothes and tore them, and so did all the men that were with him;
12 and they wailed and wept and fasted till evening over Saul and over his son Jonathan and over Jehovah’s people and over the house of Israel, because they had fallen by the sword.
13 And David said to the young man who had brought him the report “Where are you from?” and he said “I am the son of an ʽAmalekite immigrant.”
14 And David said to him “How is it you were not afraid to put out your hand to make away with Jehovah’s anointed?”
15 And David called one of the men and said “Come and cut him down”; and he stabbed him to death.
16 And David said to him “Your blood is on your own head, because your own mouth testified against you, saying ‘It was I who gave Jehovah’s anointed his death.’”
17 And David sang this lament for Saul and his son Jonathan:
18 To teach the sons of Judah.
N.B. Written in the Book of the Upright.
19 Israel, the antelope is speared on thy heights: how have champions fallen!
20 Do not tell of it in Gath, do not give out the news in the streets of Ashkelon, lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised exult.
21 Mountains in Gilboaʽ, may there never be dew nor rain on you, mountains of death; for champions’ shields were left uncared-for there, Saul’s shield unanointed with oil.
22 From blood of the slain, from the fat of champions, Jonathan’s bow never drew back, and Saul’s spear came never empty home.
23 Saul and Jonathan, the loved and the winsome, were not separated in their life and in their death; swifter than vultures they were, more stalwart than lions.
24 Daughters of Israel, weep for Saul, who clothed you in scarlet with luxury, who topped your clothing with golden jewelry.
25 How have champions fallen amid the battle!
Jonathan is speared on thy heights.
26 I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan; thou wast to me very winsome, wonderful in thy love to me beyond the love of women.
27 How have champions fallen and weapons of war been lost!
2:1-32
2 And after this David put the question to Jehovah “Shall I go up into one of the cities of Judah?” and Jehovah said to him “Go up.”
And David said “Where shall I go up to?” and he said “To Hebron.” 2 And David went up there, and also his two wives, Ahinoʽam the Jezreʽelite and Abigail the widow of Nabal the Carmelite; 3 and David brought up his men who were with him, each one with his household, and they took up their residence in the cities of Hebron; 4 and the men of Judah came and anointed David there as king over the house of Judah.
And they told David “It was the men of Jabesh in Gilead that buried Saul.”
5 And David sent envoys to the men of Jabesh in Gilead, saying to them “Jehovah bless you that you did this act of friendship by your master Saul, and buried him.
6 And now, may Jehovah do friendlily and faithfully by you; and I too will do well by you for your having done this thing.
7 Now keep up a stout heart, and show yourselves stalwart men; for Saul your sovereign is dead.
Furthermore, the house of Judah have anointed me king over them.”
8 And Abner the son of Ner, Saul’s general, took Saul’s son Ishbaal and carried him over to Mahanaim 9 and installed him as king over Gilead and the Ashurites and Jezreʽelites, and over Ephraim and Benjamin and all Israel.
10 Ishbaal the son of Saul was forty years old at his accession to the throne of Israel, and reigned two years, except that the house of Judah was on David’s side.
11 And the days that David was king in Hebron over the house of Judah amounted to seven years and six months.
12 And Abner the son of Ner and the soldiers of Ishbaal the son of Saul set out from Mahanaim to Gibeon; 13 and Joab the son of Serujah and David’s soldiers went out and met with them by the reservoir of Gibeon.
And they sat down these on one side of the reservoir and those on the other; 14 and Abner said to Joab “Let us have the boys step out and give us an exhibition”; and Joab said “Let us.” 15 And they stepped out and were counted off, twelve for Benjamin and Ishbaal the son of Saul, and twelve of David’s soldiers; 16 and each took hold of the other’s head and planted his sword in the other’s side, and they fell together; and that place was called the Rock Lot in Gibeon.
17 And it was a very hard battle that day; and Abner and the men of Israel were beaten by David’s soldiers.
18 And the three sons of Serujah were there, Joab and Abishai and ʽAsahel; and ʽAsahel was as swift-footed as any gazelle on the range.
19 And ʽAsahel pursued Abner, not turning to the right or to the left from his chase of Abner; and 20 Abner turned back and said “Is that you, ʽAsahel?” and he said “Yes.” 21 And Abner said to him “Turn to your right or your left and get hold of one of the men and take his spoils”; but ʽAsahel would not turn off from chasing him.
22 And Abner said again to ʽAsahel “Turn off from chasing me; what do you want me to strike you down for? how could I show my face to your brother Joab?” 23 But he refused to turn off; and Abner hit him below the waist with the back end of the spear, and the spear came out behind him; and he fell down and died on the spot.
And all who came to the place where ʽAsahel had fallen and died stopped.
24 But Joab and Abishai pursued Abner, and as the sun was setting they came to Ammah Hill, that is in front of Giah on the way to the wilderness of Gibeon; 25 and the sons of Benjamin rallied behind Abner and formed a single bunch, and made a stand on the top of a hill.
26 And Abner called out to Joab “Shall swords always be eating? do you not know that it will be bitter afterward? how long before you will tell the men to turn back from chasing their brothers?” 27 And Joab said “By God, if you had not spoken, it would have been in the morning that the men broke off each chasing his brother.” 28 And Joab sounded the horn, and all the men halted and made no further pursuit of the Israelites, and did no more fighting.
29 And Abner and his men made an all-night march in the Rift Valley that night, and crossed the Jordan and went through the whole Bithron and came to Mahanaim.
30 And Joab turned back from chasing Abner and gathered all the men, and there were missing of David’s soldiers nineteen men and ʽAsahel; 31 and David’s soldiers had killed of the Benjamites and of Abner’s men three hundred and sixty men.
32 And they took up ʽAsahel and buried him in his father’s tomb at Bethlehem; and Joab and his men made an all-night march, and the daylight found them at Hebron.
3:1-39
3 And the war between Saul’s house and David’s was a prolonged one; and David grew stronger and stronger, and Saul’s house weaker and weaker.
2 And sons were born to David in Hebron; and his eldest was Ammon, by Ahinoʽam the Jezreʽelite,
3 and his second Kileab by Abigail the widow of Nabal the Carmelite, and the third Absalom the son of Maʽacah the daughter of King Talmai of Geshur,
4 and the fourth Adonijah the son of Haggith, and the fifth Shephatiah the son of Abital,
5 and the sixth Jithreʽam by David’s widow ʽEglah; these were born to David in Hebron.
6 And while the war between Saul’s house and David’s was going on Abner was doing his best by Saul’s.
7 And Saul had had a concubine named Rispah the daughter of Aijah; and Ishbaal the son of Saul said to Abner “How comes it that you have gone in to my father’s concubine?”
8 and Abner was very angry at Ishbaal’s words, and said “Am I a dog’s head?
Today I am doing favors to the house of your father Saul, down to his brothers and his personal friends, and have not handed you over to David; and you are calling me to account today for this fault about the woman.
9 God do so to Abner, and more, but I will do for David as Jehovah has said to him,
10 to carry the royal power away from Saul’s house and to set up David’s throne over Israel and over Judah from Dan to Beer-Shebaʽ.”
11 And he was not able to give Abner any further answer, because he was afraid of him.
12 And Abner sent messengers to David saying “Make terms with me, and you shall have my hand with you to turn over all Israel to you.”
13 And he said “Very well; I will make terms with you; I only make one demand on you you shall not see my face unless when you come to see my face you bring Saul’s daughter Mical.”
14 And David sent envoys to Ishbaal the son of Saul with the message “Give me my wife Mical whom I betrothed for a hundred Philistine foreskins”;
15 and Ishbaal sent and took her from her husband, from Paltiel the son of Layish.
16 And her husband went with her, weeping as he went along behind her, as far as Bahurim; then Abner said to him “Now go back,” and he went back.
17 And Abner had been holding communication with the elders of Israel, telling them “You were already wanting to have David for king over you a while ago:
18 now act on it; for Jehovah has said to David ‘By the hands of my servant David I will save my people Israel out of the hands of the Philistines and of all their enemies.’”
19 And Abner also passed the word to Benjamin, and Abner also went to bring word to David at Hebron of all that had been agreed to by Israel and by all the house of Benjamin.
20 And Abner came to David at Hebron with twenty men, and David gave a banquet to Abner and the men who were with him;
21 and Abner said to David “I am going to bring all Israel together to your majesty to exchange pledges with you, and you shall be king with absolute power”; and David dismissed Abner, and he went away on friendly terms.
22 And in came David’s soldiers and Joab from a raid, bringing a great deal of plunder with them; but Abner was not in Hebron with David, because David had dismissed him and he had gone away on friendly terms.
23 And when Joab and all the forces that were with him came in, they told Joab “Abner has been to the king, and he has dismissed him and he has gone away on friendly terms.”
24 And Joab went to the king and said “What have you been doing? here Abner came to you, why did you dismiss him and let him go off?
25 you know Abner the son of Ner, and that he came to inveigle you and to find out your goings out and your comings in, and to find out everything that you are doing.”
26 And Joab went out from David’s presence and sent messengers after Abner, and they brought him back from the cistern of Sirah without David’s knowledge.
27 So Abner came back to Hebron, and Joab took him aside into the recess of the gate to speak with him quietly, and there with a thrust below the waist he stabbed him to death for the blood of his brother ʽAsahel.
28 And David heard of it afterward, and said “I and my kingdom will be innocent of the blood of Abner the son of Ner before Jehovah forever;
29 may it light on the head of Joab and on all his kin, and may Joab’s family never be without men infected with discharges and leprosy, and men that take to the spindle, and men that fall by the sword, and men that lack bread,”
30 Joab and his brother Abishai having killed Abner because he was the death of their brother ʽAsahel in battle at Gibeon.
31 And David said to Joab and to all the people that were with him “Tear your garments and tie sackcloths around your waists, and wail before Abner”; and King David walked behind the bier.
32 And they buried Abner in Hebron; and the king raised his voice and wept at Abner’s grave, and all the people wept.
33 And the king sang a dirge for Abner, “Was Abner to die as a rascal dies?
34 Your hands were not bound, nor your feet brought to the shackles: as one falls before ruffians you fell”; and all the people wept again over him.
35 And all the people came to get David to take bread while it was yet day; and David said “God do so to me, and more, if before the sun sets I taste bread or anything at all.”
36 And all the people understood, and it pleased them: like everything that the king did, it pleased all the people.
37 And all the people, and all Israel, knew that day that it was not a plan of the king’s to kill Abner the son of Ner.
38 And the king said to his servants “Do you not know that one of the chieftains and great men of Israel has fallen today?
39 And I today am David, and anointed king, but these men, the sons of Serujah, are too much for me: Jehovah repay the criminal appropriately to his crime.”
4:1-12
4 And Ishbaal the son of Saul heard that Abner had come to his death in Hebron, and he lost heart, and all Israel were in consternation.
2 And there were two men whom Ishbaal the son of Saul had as captains of raiders, one named Baʽanah and the other named Recab, sons of Rimmon the Beerothite (of the sons of Benjamin; Beeroth too is counted as belonging to Benjamin,
3 and the Beerothites have fled away to Gittaim and are living there as immigrants to this day).
4 And Jonathan the son of Saul had a crippled son: he was five years old when the news about Saul and Jonathan came from Jezreʽel, and his nurse took him up and fled, and with her haste to flee he fell and was lamed; and his name was Meribaal.
5 And the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, Recab and Baʽanah, went and entered Ishbaal’s house at the hottest part of the day, while he was lying down for his noon rest:
6 the woman who had charge of the door of the house was cleaning wheat, and dozed away and went to sleep, and Recab and his brother Baʽanah slipped through
7 and entered the house while he was lying on his bed in his sleeping-room.
And they struck him dead, and cut off his head, and took it and went along the Rift Valley, walking all night;
8 and they brought Ishbaal’s head to David at Hebron, and said to the king “Here is the head of Ishbaal, the son of your enemy Saul, who hunted for your life: Jehovah has given your majesty vengeance this day on Saul and his offspring.”
9 And David answered Recab and his brother Baʽanah, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, “By Jehovah, who has redeemed my soul out of every distress,
10 when a man told me ‘Saul is dead,’ thinking he was bringing good news, I took him and killed him in Siklag to give him his fee.
11 Shall I not all the more, now that villains have killed an honest man in his own house on his bed, call you to account for his blood and rout you out of the earth?”
12 And David gave order to his men, and they killed them and cut off their arms and legs, and hung them up by the reservoir in Hebron; and they took Ishbaal’s head and buried it in the grave of Abner the son of Ner.
5 And all the tribes of Israel came to David at Hebron and said “Here we are, your flesh and blood.
2 Even formerly, when Saul was king over us, it was you that led Israel out and in; and Jehovah said to you ‘You shall be shepherd of my people Israel, you shall be warden over Israel.’”
3 And all the elders of Israel came to the king at Hebron, and King David gave pledges to them at Hebron before Jehovah, and they anointed David king over Israel.
4 David was thirty years old when he became king, and reigned forty years:
5 at Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months, and at Jerusalem he reigned thirty-three years over all Israel and Judah.
6 And the king and his men went to Jerusalem against the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the country; and they said to David “You will not get in here unless you clear away the blind and the lame” that is to say “David will not get in here.”
7 And David took the fastness of Sion, what is now David’s City;
8 and David said that day “Anyone who strikes down a Jebusite and gets to the conduit; and the lame and the blind, hateful to David’s soul.”
For this reason they say “One blind or lame shall not come into the house.”
9 And David fixed his residence in the fastness, and called it David’s City, and built the fortifications of the city from the Millo inward.
10 And David grew greater and greater, and Jehovah the God of Armies was with him.
11 And King Hiram of Tyre sent envoys to David, and cedar timber and carpenters and masons, and they built a house for David.
12 And David knew that Jehovah had established him as king over Israel and had exalted his empire for the sake of his people Israel.
13 And David took more concubines and wives at Jerusalem after he had come from Hebron, and more children were born to David.
14 And these are the names of the sons that were born at Jerusalem: Shammuaʽ and Shobab and Nathan and Solomon
15 and Ibhar and Elishuaʽ and Nepheg and Japhiaʽ
16 and Elishamaʽ and Eljadaʽ and Eliphelet.
17 And the Philistines heard that they had anointed David king over Israel; and all the Philistines came up to look for David; and David heard of it and went down to the fastness.
18 And the Philistines had come and were foraying in Ghost Hollow;
19 and David put the question to Jehovah “Shall I go up to the Philistines? will you give them into my hands?”
And Jehovah said to David “Go up, for I will positively give the Philistines into your hands.”
20 And David came in at Baal-Perasim; and David defeated them there, and said “Jehovah burst my enemies before me like a bursting dam”; hence the place is named Baal-Perasim, “Baal of bursts.”
21 And they left their gods there, and David and his men took them up.
22 And again the Philistines came up and were foraying in Ghost Hollow,
23 and David questioned Jehovah, and he said “Do not go up; make a circuit to the rear and come to them opposite the pear-trees,
24 so that when you hear a sound of stepping in the tops of the pear-trees, then you may strike in: for then Jehovah has gone out before you to slay in the Philistine army.”
25 And David did so, as Jehovah bade him, and slew the Philistines from Gibeon till you come to Gezer.
6 And again David brought together all the picked men in Israel, thirty thousand of them; 2 and David and all the people that were with him went to Baal-Judah to bring up from there the ark of God, which wears the name of Jehovah of Armies who sits upon the cherubs.
3 And they put the ark of God in a new cart and moved it out of Abinadab’s house at Gibeah; and Abinadab’s sons, ʽUzzah and Ahjo, were driving the cart 4 with the ark of God, and Ahjo was walking in front of the ark, 5 and David and all the house of Israel were playing before Jehovah with all energy and with songs and with lyres and harps and tambourines and sistrums and cymbals.
6 And they came to Nacon’s threshing-floor, and ʽUzzah put out his hand to the ark of God and took hold of it, because the oxen jolted it.
7 And Jehovah was angry with ʽUzzah, and God smote him down on the shal, and he died there beside the ark of God.
8 And David was shocked at Jehovah’s having scathed ʽUzzah, and called that place ʽUzzah’s Scathe, which name it bears to this day.
9 And David became afraid of Jehovah that day, and said “How can the ark of Jehovah come to my home?” 10 And David was unwilling to move the ark of Jehovah to David’s City; and David took it into the house of ʽObed-Edom the Gathite.
11 And the ark of Jehovah remained in the house of ʽObed-Edom the Gathite three months, and Jehovah blessed ʽObed-Edom and all his house.
12 And King David was told “Jehovah has blessed ʽObed-Edom and all that belongs to him on account of the ark of God”; and David went and brought up the ark of God from ʽObed-Edom’s house to David’s City with festivity.
13 And when the bearers of the ark of Jehovah had taken six steps, he sacrificed a bull and a stall-fed calf; 14 and David was whirling with all energy before Jehovah, with a linen ephod belted round him, 15 while David and all the house of Israel brought up the ark of Jehovah with cheering and blasts of ram-horns.
16 And when the ark of Jehovah came to David’s City, Mical the daughter of Saul looked out through the window and saw King David capering and whirling before Jehovah, and felt a contempt for him.
17 And they brought the ark of Jehovah in and set it in its place in the tent David had pitched for it; and David offered burnt-offerings before Jehovah, and welfare-sacrifices.
18 And when David finished offering the burnt-offering and the welfare-sacrifices he blessed the people in the name of Jehovah of Armies, 19 and distributed to all the people, all the host of Israel, women as well as men, a ritual-cake of bread apiece and a steak and a cake of raisins; and all the people went to their homes.
20 And David went home to bless his house, and Mical the daughter of Saul came out to meet David and said “How glorious today was the king of Israel, who exposed himself today before the eyes of his subjects’ slave-women just as any of the riffraff would go and expose himself!” 21 And David said to Mical “Before the presence of Jehovah, who chose me in preference to your father and all his family, appointing me warden over Jehovah’s people Israel; so I play before Jehovah, 22 and do things still more ignominious, and am low in my own eyes; but among the slave-women that you speak of, among them I am respected.” 23 And Mical the daughter of Saul never had a child till the day of her death.
7:1-29
7 And when the king was settled in his house and Jehovah had given him rest on all sides from all his enemies,
2 the king said to the prophet Nathan “See here, I am living in a cedar house, but the ark of God stands with a curtain around it.”
3 And Nathan said to the king “Whatever you have in mind go and do: for Jehovah is with you.”
4 But that night Jehovah’s word came to Nathan,
5 “Go and say to my servant David ‘Says Jehovah, Are you to build me a house to live in?
6 for I have never lived in a house from the day of my bringing the sons of Israel up out of Egypt to this day, but have gone in a tent and a tabernacle.
7 In all my going about among all the sons of Israel did I ever speak with one of the judges of Israel whom I commissioned to be shepherds of my people Israel to say “Why have you not built me a cedar house?”’
8 And now you are to say to my servant David ‘Says Jehovah of Armies, I took you from the pasture, from following the sheep, to be warden over my people Israel,
9 and I was with you wherever you went and exterminated all your enemies before you; and I will make you a name like the names of the great of the earth,
10 and will fix a place for my people Israel and plant them, and they shall dwell in one spot and never be disturbed again, and no longer shall the men of foul play grind them down as they formerly did,
11 ever since the day that I commissioned judges over my people Israel; and I will give you rest from all your enemies.
And Jehovah tells you that Jehovah will build you a house:
12 when your days are full and you lie down with your fathers, I will raise up after you your issue who shall come out of your body, and I will establish his kingship.
13 He shall build me a house, and I will make his throne firm forever.
14 I will be father to him and he shall be son to me, so that when he does wrong I will correct him with a human rod and human strokes,
15 but my friendship I will never withdraw from him as I withdrew it from the one that was before you.
16 And your house and your kingship shall be secure forever before me; your throne shall be firm forever.’”
17 Just these words, just this vision, Nathan spoke to David.
18 And King David went in and sat down before Jehovah and said “Who am I, Lord Jehovah, and who are my house, that you have brought me so far as this?
19 And this has seemed to you a little thing too, Lord Jehovah, and you have also made promises about your servant’s house to distant times, and I am to see the generations of mankind, Lord Jehovah!
20 And what more should David say to you? you know your servant, Lord Jehovah.
21 For the sake of your own promise, and in accordance with your own will, you have done all this great work, to let your servant know.
22 Therefore are you great, Lord Jehovah, because there is none like you and no God but you, as in everything that we have heard with our ears;
23 and who is like your people Israel, a single nation on earth which a God has gone to redeem for a people of his own to make a name for himself, and to do great and terrible things for them, driving out before your people whom you redeemed out of Egypt nations and gods
24 and establishing your people Israel as your people forever, and you, Jehovah, becoming their God!
25 And now, Lord Jehovah, make good forever the promise you have given about your servant and his house, and do as you have promised;
26 and your name will be great forever, men saying ‘Jehovah of Armies is God over Israel’; and your servant David’s house will be firm before you;
27 because you, Jehovah of Armies, God of Israel, have made this disclosure to your servant, ‘I will build you a house’ this is why your servant has found heart to offer this prayer to you.
28 And now, Lord Jehovah, you are God, and your word shall be truth; and you have promised to your servant this much good;
29 now stand to it and bless your servant’s house that it may be forever before you, because you have spoken, Lord Jehovah, and from your blessing your servant’s house is to be blessed forever.”
8:1-18
8 And after this David defeated the Philistines and humbled them, and David took Metheg Ha-Ammah out of the Philistines’ hands.
2 And he defeated the Moabites and measured them with a line, making them lie down on the ground: he measured two lines to put to death and a full line to keep alive; and the Moabites became subject to David as tributaries.
3 And David defeated Hadadʽezer the son of Rehob, the king of Soba, when he went to set up his power at the River;
4 and David took from him seventeen hundred horsemen and twenty thousand footmen, and hamstrung all the chariot ponies, leaving a hundred teams.
5 And the Syrians of Damascus came to help Hadadʽezer, and David killed twenty-two thousand men of the Syrians.
6 And David set up prefects in Damascene Syria, and the Syrians became tributary subjects of David; and Jehovah made David victorious wherever he went.
7 And David took the golden bucklers that were on Hadadʽezer’s officers, and brought them to Jerusalem.
8 And from Tebah and Berothai, Hadadʽezer’s cities, David took very much bronze.
9 And King Toghu of Hamath heard that David had defeated Hadadʽezer’s forces,
10 and Toghu sent his son Hadad-ram to King David to ask how he was doing and to bless him for having fought and beaten Hadadʽezer (for Hadadʽezer was a standing enemy of Toghu), and he brought with him articles of silver and of gold and of bronze
11 (these too King David dedicated to Jehovah, with the silver and gold that he dedicated out of all the nations he had subjugated,
12 Edom and Moab and the Bene-ʽAmmon and the Philistines and the ʽAmalekites, and out of the booty from Hadadʽezer the son of Rehob, the king of Sobah).
13 And David won fame when he came back from defeating the Syrians and defeated the Edomites in Salt Valley, killing eighteen thousand.
14 And he set up prefects in Edom; all over Edom he set up prefects; and all the Edomites became subjects of David, and Jehovah made David victorious wherever he went.
15 And David reigned over all Israel; and David did justice and equity for all his people.
16 And Joab the son of Serujah was over the army, and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was private secretary,
17 and Sadok and Abiathar the son of Ahimelec the son of Ahitub were priests, and Shausha was secretary for documents,
18 and Benajah the son of Jehojadaʽ was over the Cretans and the Pletans, and David’s sons were priests.
9:1-13
9 And David said “Is there still left anyone of Saul’s family, whom I may befriend for Jonathan’s sake?”
2 And there was a slave of Saul’s family, named Siba; and they summoned him to David.
And the king said to him “Are you Siba?” and he said “Your servant.”
3 And the king said “Is there no man left of Saul’s family, whom I may befriend in God’s name?”
And Siba said to the king “There is still a crippled son of Jonathan’s.”
4 And the king said to him “Where is he?”
And Siba said to the king “He is in Lo-Debar at the house of Makir the son of ʽAmmiel.”
5 And King David sent and took him out of the house of Makir the son of ʽAmmiel at Lo-Debar;
6 and Meribaal, the son of Jonathan the son of Saul, came to David and threw himself down on his face and did him reverence; and David said “Meribaal!” and he said “Your servant is here.”
7 And David said to him “Do not be afraid: befriend you I will for the sake of your father Jonathan, and will restore to you all the fields of your father Saul; and you shall always eat bread at my table.”
8 And he did reverence, and said “What is your servant, that you have turned your mind to such a dead dog as I?”
9 And the king called for Siba Saul’s man, and said to him “Everything that belonged to Saul and to all his family I give to your master’s son;
10 and you shall work the land for him, you and your sons and your slaves, and bring in, so that your master’s son shall have bread to eat; but Meribaal your master’s son shall always eat bread at my table.”
(And Siba had fifteen sons and twenty slaves.)
11 And Siba said to the king “Your servant will do in every respect as your majesty commands him.”
And Meribaal eats at David’s table like one of the king’s sons.
12 And Meribaal has a little son named Mica; and all the inmates of Siba’s house are slaves of Meribaal.
13 And Meribaal lives in Jerusalem, because he always eats at the king’s table and he is lame in both feet.
10:1-19
10 And after this the king of the Bene-ʽAmmon died, and his son Hanun succeeded him.
2 And David thought “I will be friendly to Hanun the son of Nahash, as his father was to me”; and David sent by his officers to express sympathy with him at the loss of his father.
And David’s officers came to the country of the Bene-ʽAmmon;
3 and the chiefs of the Bene-ʽAmmon said to Hanun their sovereign “Do you think David is honoring your father when he sends you ambassadors of condolence? is it not for the sake of examining the city and spying into it and laying it in ruins that David has sent his officers to you?”
4 And Hanun took David’s officers and shaved off half their beards and cut off their habiliments in the middle, up to their buttocks, and sent them off.
5 And David was told of it, and he sent to meet them (for the men were greatly humiliated); and the king said “Stay at Jericho till your beards grow, and then come back.”
6 And the Bene-ʽAmmon saw that they were at deadly feud with David; and the Bene-ʽAmmon sent and hired the Syrians of Beth-Rehob and the Syrians of Soba, twenty thousand infantry, and the king of Maʽacah a thousand men, and the men of Tob twelve thousand men.
7 And David heard, and sent Joab with all the forces, the champions;
8 and the Bene-ʽAmmon came out and drew up their line of battle at the gate, and the Syrians of Soba and Rehob and the men of Tob and Maʽacah were by themselves in the open.
9 And Joab saw that he had the front of the battle in his front and in his rear; and he made a selection of picked men out of the whole Israelite body, and drew them up to face the Syrians,
10 and the rest of the men he put into the hands of his brother Abishai and drew them up to face the Bene-ʽAmmon,
11 and said “If the Syrians are too strong for me, then you shall be a rescue to me; and if the Bene-ʽAmmon are too strong for you, I will go to rescue you.
12 Hold fast, and let us do our best for our people and for the cities of our God, and Jehovah will do as he sees fit.” 13 And Joab and the troops that he had with him came on to attack the Syrians, and they fled before him;
14 and the Bene-ʽAmmon saw that the Syrians had fled, and they fled before Abishai and entered the city.
And Joab came back from the ʽAmmonite war to Jerusalem.
15 And the Syrians saw that they were beaten by the Israelites; and they came together,
16 and Hadadʽezer sent and called out the Syrians beyond the River, and they came to Helam with Shobac, Hadadʽezer’s general, at their head.
17 And David was told, and he brought together all the Israelites and crossed the Jordan and came to Helam; and the Syrians offered battle to David, and he fought them.
18 And the Syrians fled before the Israelites, and David killed of the Syrians seven hundred chariotry and forty thousand infantry, and Shobac, Hadadʽezer’s general, got his death-stroke there and died on the field.
19 And all the kings who were subject to Hadadʽezer saw that they were beaten by the Israelites, and made peace with the Israelites and became their subjects; and the Syrians were afraid to succor the Bene-ʽAmmon any longer.
11:1-27
11 And at the return of the year, at the time when the messengers went out, David sent Joab, and with him his soldiers and all Israel, and they ravaged the Bene-ʽAmmon and laid siege to Rabbah, and David was staying in Jerusalem.
2 And at evening time David rose from his couch and took a walk on the palace roof; and from the roof he saw a woman bathing, and it was a very handsome woman.
3 And David sent and inquired about the woman, and they said “Why, that is Bath-Shebaʽ, Eliʽam’s daughter, Urijah the Hittite’s wife.”
4 And David sent messengers and fetched her; and she came to him and he lay with her, when she was in purification from her uncleanness; and she went back to her home.
5 And the woman became pregnant, and sent and told David “I am pregnant.”
6 And David sent to Joab, “Send Urijah the Hittite to me”; and Joab sent Urijah to David.
7 And Urijah came to him, and David asked him how Joab was doing and how the men were doing and how the war was doing;
8 and David said to Urijah “Go down to your house and wash your feet”; and Urijah went out of the palace, and after him a portion of the king’s food.
9 And Urijah slept at the palace door with all his fellow-soldiers and did not go down to his house;
10 and they told David “Urijah did not go down to his house,” and David said to Urijah “Why, you have been away and just got home; how is it that you do not go down to your house?”
11 And Urijah said to David “The Ark and the Israelites and Judahites are living in booths, and his highness Joab and your majesty’s officers are camping in the open field; and shall I go into my house to eat and drink and lie with my wife? by Jehovah and by your life, I will not do any such thing.”
12 And David said to Urijah “Stay here one day more, and tomorrow I will send you off.”
And Urijah stayed in Jerusalem that day; and on the next day
13 David invited him to eat and drink before him, and made him drunk; and at evening he went out to sleep in his sleeping-place with his fellow-officers, and did not go down to his house.
14 And in the morning David wrote a letter to Joab and sent it by Urijah;
15 and in the letter he wrote “Put Urijah at the front in the place where the fighting is hardest, and fall back from supporting him, so that he shall get killed.”
16 And while he was besieging the city Joab stationed Urijah at a place where he knew there were stalwart men.
17 And the men of the city came out and fought Joab, and some of the troops, of David’s soldiers, fell; and Urijah the Hittite also lost his life.
18 And Joab sent and reported to David all about the war,
19 and in instructing the messenger he said “When you have finished telling the king all about the war, 20 if the king is out of temper and says to you ‘How came you to go fighting close to the city? did you not know they would shoot from the wall?
21 Who killed Abimelec the son of Jerubbaal? did not a woman throw the upper stone of a mill on him from the wall so that it was his death, at Tebes? why did you go close to the wall?’ then say ‘Urijah the Hittite is dead too.’”
22 And the messenger went, and came and told David all that Joab sent him to say, all about the war; and David was angry and said to the messenger “Why did you go fighting close to the city? did you not know you would be shot down from the wall?”
23 and the messenger said to David “Because the men braved us and came out to meet us in the open; and we pressed them clear to the gate,
24 and the archers shot at your soldiers off the wall, and of the royal soldiers about eighteen men were killed and your servant Urijah the Hittite was killed too.”
25 And David said to the messenger “You will say to Joab ‘Do not feel badly about this matter, that the sword makes such havoc; push the war against the city, and demolish it’; encourage him.”
26 And Urijah’s wife heard that her husband Urijah was dead, and wailed over her husband;
27 and when the mourning-time was past David sent and brought her into his house, and she became his wife and bore him a son.
12 And Jehovah disapproved the thing that David had done, and sent Nathan to David; and he came and said to him “There were two men in the same city, one rich and one poor: 2 the rich man had a great many sheep and cattle, 3 the poor man had nothing at all but one little lamb which he had bought and raised, and it had grown up in company with him and his children; it ate of his crusts, and drank from his cup, and slept in his arms, and was like a daughter to him.
4 And a chance guest came to the rich man; and he could not bear to take any of his sheep or cattle to cook for the traveler that he had had come to him, but took the poor man’s lamb and cooked it for the man that had come to him.” 5 And David was greatly incensed against the man, and said to Nathan “By Jehovah, the man that did that is going to die; 6 and he shall pay for the lamb seven times its value, because he did that thing and had no mercy.”
7 And Nathan said to David “You are the man.
Says Jehovah, the God of Israel, ‘I anointed you king over Israel, and delivered you from Saul’s hands, 8 and gave you your master’s daughters and your master’s wives to lie in your bosom, and I gave you the girls of Israel and Judah, and if that had been too little I would have added as many over and over.
9 How comes it that you have despised Jehovah in doing what he disapproves? you have struck down Urijah the Hittite with the sword and taken his wife as your own, and him you have killed with the sword of the Bene-ʽAmmon; 10 and now the sword will not quit your house forever, because you despised me and took Urijah the Hittite’s wife to be your own.
11 I, says Jehovah, will raise mischief against you out of your own family, and will take your wives before your eyes and give them to your neighbor, and he shall lie with your wives in sight of this sun; 12 for you did it in secret, but I will do this thing before all Israel and before the sun.”
13 And David said to Nathan “I have sinned against Jehovah.”
And Nathan said to David “And Jehovah on his part has set aside your sin; you shall not die; 14 the son that is born to you shall die though, because you did treat Jehovah with contempt in this matter.” 15 And Nathan went home.
And Jehovah smote the child that Urijah’s widow bore to David, and it was taken desperately sick.
16 And David betook himself to God on behalf of the boy; and David kept fast, and used to go to his room and lie on the floor all night.
17 And the elders of his house rose to stand over him and get him to rise off the floor; but he would not, and did not take bread with them.
18 And on the seventh day the child died; and David’s officers were afraid to tell him the child was dead, because they thought “Here we spoke to him while the child was alive and he did not obey, and how are we to tell him ‘The child is dead’? and he will do something bad.” 19 And David saw that his officers were whispering to each other, and David understood that the child was dead; and David said to his officers “Is the child dead?” and they said “He is.” 20 And David got up off the floor, and bathed and oiled himself and changed his dress and went into the house of Jehovah and did reverence, and came into his house and asked for bread; and they set it before him, and he ate it.
21 And his officers said to him “What does this mean that you have done? while the child was alive you fasted and wept on his account, and when the child was dead you got up and ate bread.” 22 And he said “While the child was still alive I fasted and wept because I thought ‘Who knows whether Jehovah may be gracious to me, and the child live?’ 23 But now he is dead: what was I fasting for? could I yet bring him back?
I am going to him, but he will not come back to me.” 24 And David comforted his wife Bath-Shebaʽ, and went in to her and lay with her, and she had a son; and he named him Solomon; and Jehovah loved him, 25 and sent by the prophet Nathan and named him Jedidiah after Jehovah.
26 And Joab attacked Rabbah of the Bene-ʽAmmon, and took the palace city.
27 And Joab sent messengers to David with the message “I have attacked Rabbah, and I took the water city.
28 Now bring together the rest of the people and beleaguer the city and take it, lest I should take it and it should carry my name.” 29 And David brought together all the people and went to Rabbah and attacked the city and took it; 30 and he took the crown of Malcam off his head, and its weight was a hundredweight of gold; and it had a precious stone in it, which came to be on David’s head.
And he took out the plunder of the city, a very great amount; 31 and the people in it he took out and put them to saws and iron cuts and iron picks, and put them through the brickyard; and so he did with all the cities of the Bene-ʽAmmon.
And David and all the people went back to Jerusalem.
13:1-39
13 And after this it befell that David’s son Absalom had a beautiful sister named Tamar, and David’s son Amnon fell in love with her; 2 and Amnon was in such distress on account of his sister Tamar that he made himself sick, because she was a maiden and it seemed to Amnon out of the question to do anything to her.
3 And Amnon had a comrade whose name was Jonadab, the son of David’s brother Shimeah; and Jonadab was a very wise man; 4 and he said to him “How is it that you are like this, prince, getting poorer morning by morning? will you not tell me?” and Amnon said to him “I am in love with Tamar, my brother Absalom’s sister.” 5 And Jonadab said to him “Take to your bed and pretend to be sick, and when your father comes to see you, say to him ‘Let my sister Tamar come and feed me, and let her make the food before my eyes, so that I may see, and let me eat out of her hand.’”
6 And Amnon went to bed and pretended to be sick, and when the king came to see him Amnon said to the king “Let my sister Tamar come and mold a few heart-cakes before my eyes and let me have my food out of her hand”; 7 and David sent word to Tamar at the palace “Come to your brother Amnon’s house and make his food for him.” 8 And Tamar went to her brother Amnon’s house, he being abed, and took the dough and kneaded it and molded it before his eyes and fried the heart-cakes, 9 and took the pan and poured them out before him; but he refused to eat.
And Amnon said “Put the men all out of my presence”; and all the men went out of his presence.
10 And Amnon said to Tamar “Bring the food into the chamber and let me eat out of your hand”; and Tamar took the heart-cakes she had made and brought them into the chamber to her brother Amnon 11 and presented them to him to eat, and he took hold of her and said to her “Come and lie with me, sister.” 12 And she said to him “Don’t, brother, don’t abuse me: it is not done in Israel; don’t commit this scandal.
13 Where should I take my dishonor to? and you would be rated like one of the reprobates in Israel; now speak to the king, for he will not refuse me to you”; 14 but he would not obey, but overpowered her and violated her and lay with her.
15 And Amnon took an aversion to her
a very great aversion, for his aversion to her was greater than the love he felt for her had been; and Amnon said to her “Get up and go.” 16 And she said to him “Don’t, brother: this last injury that you do to me in turning me out is a greater one than the first”; but he would not listen to her, 17 but called his man and said “Do get this out of the house and lock the door after her.” 18 And she had on a long tunic with sleeves, for the king’s maiden daughters dressed so in gowns; and when his attendant put her out and locked the door after her, 19 Tamar took ashes and put them on her head, and tore the long tunic she had on, and put her arms over her head and went along screaming as she went.
20 And her brother Absalom said to her “Has your brother Amnon been with you? now, sister, be quiet; he is your brother; do not take this to heart.”
And Tamar lived desolate in her brother Absalom’s house.
21 And King David heard all these things and was very angry; 22 and Absalom did not speak with Amnon either good words or bad, because Absalom hated Amnon for having violated his sister Tamar.
23 And after two years’ time Absalom had sheepshearers at Baal-Hasor near ʽEphron, and Absalom invited all the princes.
24 And Absalom went in to the king and said “Your servant has shearers: will the king and his officers please come with your servant?” 25 And the king said to Absalom “No, my son, let us not all go, or we shall burden you.”
And he urged him; but he would not go, and said goodbye to him.
26 And Absalom said “If not, let brother Amnon go with’ us”; and the king said to him “Why should he go with you?” 27 but Absalom urged him, and the king sent with him Amnon and all they princes.
28 And Absalom made a wassail like the king’s; and Absalom gave his men the order “Look here: when Amnon is mellow with wine, I will say to you ‘Hit Amnon,’ and you are to kill him; do not be afraid; you have my orders; stand up to your job and show that you amount to something.” 29 And Absalom’s men did to Amnon as Absalom ordered them to; and all the princes sprang to their feet and mounted their mules and fled.
30 And while they were on the road the report came to David “Absalom has killed all the princes, there is not one of them left”; 31 and the king sprang to his feet and tore his clothes and threw himself on the ground, and all his officers who were standing in his presence tore their clothes.
32 But Jonadab the son of David’s brother Shimeah answered “My lord must not think they have killed all the young princes: only Amnon is dead, because there has been an ugly look around Absalom’s mouth since the day that he violated his sister Tamar.
33 Now your majesty must not pay any attention to such talk as that all the princes are dead, because it is only Amnon that is dead, 34 and Absalom has fled.”
And the young man who was on the watch raised his eyes and saw that a great number of persons were going along the Beth-Horon road at the descent; and the watchman came and told the king “I saw men in the direction of Beth-Horon, toward the mountainside.” 35 And Jonadab said to the king “Here the princes are coming; it has come out just as your servant said.” 36 And as he finished speaking, up came the princes; and they raised their voices and wept, and the king and all his officers wept too, making a very great weeping.
37 (But Absalom left the country, and went to Talmai the son of ʽAmmihud, the king of Geshur.)
And he mourned for his son all the time.
38 But Absalom left the country, and went to Geshur and was there three years.
39 And the king pined away for Absalom when he was reconciled to Amnon’s being dead;
14:1-33
14 and Joab the son of Serujah perceived that the king was well disposed toward Absalom.
2 And Joab sent to Tekoaʽ and got a wise woman from there, and said to her “Go into mourning, put on mourning clothes and do not rub yourself with oil, and be like a woman who has been in mourning for a death these many days; 3 and come to the king and say this word to him
” and Joab dictated the words to her.
4 And the Tekoʽite woman came to the king and threw herself down flat on her face and did reverence, and said “Help, your majesty!” 5 And the king said “What is the matter?”
And she said “You see, I am a widow woman, my husband is dead; 6 and your servant had two sons, and the two of them had a tussle out on the range, with no one to part them, and he hit him
one of them hit the other one and killed him.
7 And there the whole clan stood up against your servant and said ‘Give us the brother-killer to be put to death for the life of his brother whom he killed, so that we can make away with the heir too’; and they will put out the spark that is left me, not giving my husband a name and remnant on the face of the earth.”
8 And the king said to the woman “Go to your home, and I will give orders about you.” 9 And the Tekoʽite woman said to the king “On me be the offense, your majesty, and on my family; and may the king and his throne go clear.” 10 And the king said “Anyone who speaks to you, bring him to me and he shall not touch you again.” 11 And she said “Will your majesty please name your God Jehovah for assurance that the blood-reclaimer shall not ravage by wholesale and that they shall not make away with my son?”
And he said “By Jehovah, not a hair of your son shall fall to the ground.”
12 And the woman said “Will you let your servant say something to your majesty?” and he said “Say it.” 13 And the woman said “And why have you had such a design as this against God’s people
which, by the word the king has said, amounts to guilt
that the king should not bring home his outcast? 14 because die we do, and are like water spilled on the ground, that is not to be picked up; and God will not take away the life of one who lays plans not to banish an outcast from him.
15 And now as to my having come to speak of this thing to your majesty, it was because the people frightened me, and your servant thought ‘let’s speak to the king, perhaps the king will do as his servant says 16 when the king hears, rescue his servant out of the hand of the man who is trying to make away with me and my son together out of God’s estate.’ 17 And your servant thought ‘let his majesty’s word settle it; for his majesty is like the Angel of God at making out what is good and what is bad.’
And may your God Jehovah be with you.”
18 And the king answered the woman “Do not refuse to answer a question I am going to ask you”; and she said “Say it, your majesty.” 19 And the king said “Does Joab have a hand in all this business of yours?”
And the woman answered “By your life, your majesty, there is no getting by anything that your majesty has said: it was your servant Joab that told me to do it and put all these words in your servant’s mouth.
20 It was for the sake of facing the thing a different way that your servant Joab did this thing; and your majesty is as wise as the Angel of God is, so as to know everything on earth.”
21 And the king said to Joab “Well, I am doing the thing: go bring back the boy
Absalom.” 22 And Joab threw himself down flat on his face and did reverence, and blessed the king, and said “I thank, your majesty heartily that today your majesty has done the thing your servant said”; 23 and Joab went off to Geshur and brought Absalom to Jerusalem.
24 But the king said “Have him go along to his house, and not see my face”; so Absalom went along to his house and did not see the king’s face.
25 Now there was no man in all Israel so handsome as Absalom, thoroughly admirable: from foot to crown there was not a flaw in him.
26 When he shaved his head (from time to time he did shave it; he shaved it when it felt heavy) he weighed the hair of it, and it came to three and a half pounds of the king’s standard.
27 And Absalom had three sons born to him, and one daughter, whose name was Tamar; she was a beauty.
28 And Absalom lived in Jerusalem for two years’ time without seeing the king’s face.
29 And Absalom sent for Joab to send him to the king, but he would not come to him; and he sent again, but he would not come.
30 And he said to his servants “Look here: Joab’s lot is next me, and he has barley there; go set it on fire.”
And Absalom’s servants set the lot on fire; 31 and Joab went off and went into the house where Absalom was, and said to him “Why have your servants set that lot of mine on fire?” 32 and Absalom said to Joab “I was sending you word ‘Come here so that I can send you to the king to say “Why have I come from Geshur?
I should be better off if I were still there; now let me see the king’s face, and if there is crime in me let him put me to death.”’” 33 And Joab went in to the king and told him; and the king called for Absalom, and he went in to the king and prostrated himself on the ground in reverence before the king, and the king kissed Absalom.
15:1-37
15 And after this Absalom set up a carriage and ponies, with fifty men running before him; 2 and the first thing in the morning Absalom would be standing beside the road to the gate, and to every man who had a lawsuit to come to the king for trial Absalom called out “What city are you from?” and he said “Your servant is from such a tribe of Israel,” 3 and Absalom said to him “Look here, your case is all right and in order, but you have nobody from the king to hear you”; 4 and Absalom said “If only I were made judge in the country! and every man who had a lawsuit should come to me, and I would give him his rights.” 5 And when a man approached to do reverence to him, he would put out his hand and catch hold of him and kiss him.
6 And Absalom did the like to all the Israelites who came to the king to have cases tried; and Absalom cajoled the men of Israel.
7 And at the end of four years Absalom said to the king “Let me go and pay my vow that I have made to Jehovah at Hebron.
8 For your servant made a vow when I was living at Geshur in Syria, ‘If Jehovah shall bring me back to Jerusalem, I will worship Jehovah.’” 9 And the king said to him “Go, and good betide you”; and he went off to Hebron.
10 And Absalom sent emissaries through all the tribes of Israel with the message “When you hear the sound of the ram-horn, say ‘Absalom is declared king at Hebron.’” 11 And with Absalom went two hundred men from Jerusalem as guests, who went in good faith and had no knowledge of anything.
12 And Absalom sent for Ahithophel the Gilonite, David’s counselor, from his city Giloh, when he was offering the sacrifices; and the revolutionary movement became powerful, and the people with Absalom grew more and more numerous.
13 And the news came to David that the feeling of the men of Israel was on Absalom’s side; 14 and David said to all his officers who were with him at Jerusalem “Let us get away right off, because there is not going to be anything left of us with what Absalom is doing; be quick about going, for fear he should come quick and catch us here and slam the worst on us, and massacre the city”; 15 and the king’s officers said to the king “Just as your majesty pleases, your servants are ready.” 16 And the king went out with all his family behind him; but the king left ten concubine wives to keep the house.
17 And the king went out, and all the people behind him, and stood at Beth-hammerhak, 18 with all his soldiers passing by on one side of him, and all the Cretans and Pletans, and all the Gathites, six hundred men, who had come behind him from Gath, passing by before the king.
19 And the king said to Ittai the Gathite “Why should you too go with us? go back and stay with the king, because you are a foreigner, and an exile from your place to boot.
20 It was yesterday you came, and today should I take you back and forth to go with us while I go where I may go?
Go back, and take your brothers back with you; and may Jehovah do friendlily and faithfully by you.” 21 But Ittai answered the king “By Jehovah and by your majesty’s life, at the place where your majesty is, be it for death or be it for life, there your servant will be.” 22 And David said to Ittai “Pass on”; and Ittai the Gathite went past, and all his men and all the women and children he had with him.
23 And all the country was weeping loudly, and all the people going across, and the king going across in Kidron Arroyo, and all the people. going across along and beside the road to the Wilderness Olive-Tree, 24 and on came also Sadok and Abiathar carrying the ark of God’s covenant; and they set the ark down, and Abiathar went up till all the people had finished crossing over from the city.
25 And the king said to Sadok “Take the ark of God back to the city and let it stay in its place; if I have Jehovah’s goodwill he will bring me back and let me see him and his ground; 26 but if he says ‘I am not pleased with you,’ here I am; let him do as seems best to him.” 27 And the king said to Priest Sadok “Look here: go back to the city, you and Abiathar, and good betide you; and both your sons with you, your son Ahimaʽas and Abiathar’s son Jonathan.
28 Look here, I am delaying at the Wilderness Fords till word comes from you, reporting to me.” 29 And Sadok and Abiathar took the ark of God back to Jerusalem, and it remained there.
30 But David went up the Olive Slope weeping all the way, with a muffled head and walking barefoot; and all the people that were with him muffled their heads and went up weeping all the way.
31 And David had been told “Ahithophel is among the ones who are with Absalom conducting the revolution”; and David had said “Make Ahithophel’s policy foolish, Jehovah my God.” 32 And as David came to the crest where one does reverence to God, he found Hushai the Arkite coming to meet him with his tunic torn and earth on his head; 33 and David said to him “If you go over with me you will be a clog on me, 34 but if you go back to the city and say to Absalom ‘I will be your servant, your majesty; I was your father’s servant in the past, and now I am yours’ you may balk Ahithophel’s policy for me.
35 You see, you will have with you there Priests Sadok and Abiathar, and every piece of news that you hear from the palace you will tell to Priests Sadok and Abiathar.
36 There with them they have their two sons, Sadok’s Ahimaʽas and Abiathar’s Jonathan, and you will send me by them every piece of news that you hear.” 37 And David’s friend Hushai went into the city as Absalom was coming to Jerusalem.
16 And David, passing a little beyond the crest, found Meribaal’s man Siba coming to meet him, with a pair of saddled donkeys and on them two hundred cakes of bread and a hundred clusters of raisins and a hundred of dates, and a skin of wine; 2 and the king said to Siba “What have you here?”
And Siba said “The donkeys are for the king’s family to ride on, and the bread and dates for the men to eat, and the wine for anyone who grows faint in the wilderness to drink.” 3 And the king said “And where is your master’s son?” and Siba said to the king “You will find him staying in Jerusalem, because he thought ‘Today the house of Israel will give me back my father’s kingship.’” 4 And the king said to Siba “Here, everything that belongs to Meribaal is yours.”
And Siba said “My duty to your majesty; I thank your majesty.”
5 And King David came to Bahurim, and found coming out from there a man of Saul’s clan named Shimei son of Gera, cursing as he came out 6 and pelting David and all King David’s officers with stones, while all the people and all the champions were on his right and on his left; 7 and what Shimei said in his cursing was “Out with you, out with you, you cutthroat, you rowdy! 8 Jehovah has sent back upon you all the blood of the family of Saul in whose place you have reigned! and Jehovah has given the kingship into the hands of your son Absalom, and here you are in your trouble, cutthroat that you are!” 9 And Abishai the son of Serujah said to the king “Why should this dead dog be cursing your majesty? let me go over and take off his head.” 10 But the king said “What business is it of you sons of Serujah that he curses, and that Jehovah has said to him ‘Curse David,’ and who is to say ‘How came you to do so?’” 11 And David said to Abishai and to all his officers “Here my own son, who came of my body, is hunting for my life, how much more then may the Benjamite? leave him to curse, because Jehovah has told him to.
12 Perhaps Jehovah will look upon my wretched state, and Jehovah will repay me good for my cursing today.” 13 And David and his men went on in the road, with Shimei going along the mountain-slope parallel with them, cursing and pelting with stones opposite to them as he went, and throwing dust.
14 And the king and all the people who were with him came to ʽAyephim, and there they rested up; 15 but Absalom and all the men of Israel came into Jerusalem, and Ahithophel with him.
16 And when David’s friend Hushai the Arkite came to Absalom, Hushai said to Absalom “Long live the king! long live the king!” 17 And Absalom said to Hushai “There is friendship for you! why did you not go with your friend?” 18 But Hushai said to Absalom “No, whomever Jehovah and this people and all the men of Israel choose, I will be for him and stay with him.
19 And in the next place, whom should I serve? should it not be before his son? as I have served your father, such I will be before you.”
20 And Absalom said to Ahithophel “Give us your advice what to do.” 21 And Ahithophel said to Absalom “Go in to your father’s concubines whom he has left to keep the house, and all Israel will hear that you are at deadly feud with your father, and all who are with you will be on their mettle.” 22 And they pitched the tent for Absalom on the roof, and Absalom went in to his father’s concubines in sight of all Israel.
23 Now the advice Ahithophel gave in those days was as if one submitted a question to the word of God: such was all Ahithophel’s advice both to David and to Absalom.
17:1-29
17 And Ahithophel said to Absalom “Let me pick out twelve thousand men and be off tonight to pursue your father, 2 and come upon him while he is tired and disheartened, and take him by surprise; and all the people he has with him will run, and I will strike down the a king alone, 3 and bring all the people back to you as a bride comes back to her husband; you want only one man’s life, and all the people will be unharmed”; 4 and the idea suited Absalom and all the elders, of Israel.
5 And Absalom said “Call Hushai the Arkite too, and let us hear what he too has to say.” 6 And Hushai came to Absalom, and Absalom said to him “This was Ahithophel’s idea: shall we do as he says? if not, tell us yours.” 7 And Hushai said to Absalom “The advice Ahithophel has given is not good this time.” 8 And Hushai said “You yourself know your father and his men to be champion warriors; and they are in as bad a temper as a bear out on the range that has lost her cubs.
And your father is an old soldier and will not spend the night with the troops: 9 there he is now hiding in one of the sinkholes, or in some place; and when he falls on them at the start, anyone who hears of it will hear and say ‘There has been a slaughter among the people who are on Absalom’s side’; 10 and even a brave man with a heart like a lion’s will melt right down; for all Israel knows that your father is a champion and those who are with him are brave men.
11 But, I advise, let all Israel be brought together to you, from Dan to Beer-Shebaʽ, in numbers like the sand by the sea, with your person going among them; 12 and we will come to him at some place where he may be found, and light on him as the dew falls on the ground, and of him and all the men with him there will not be a single one left; 13 and if he retreats to a city, all Israel shall carry ropes to the city, and we will drag it to the arroyo till there is not even a pebble to be found a there.” 14 And Absalom and all the men of Israel said “Hushai the Arkite’s policy is better than Ahithophel’s,” Jehovah having ordained to balk Ahithophel’s good policy, to the end that Jehovah might bring mischief on Absalom.
15 And Hushai said to Priests Sadok and Abiathar “Ahithophel has given Absalom and the elders of Israel such and such advice, and I have given such and such.
16 Now send quickly and tell David ‘Do not halt at the Wilderness Fords for tonight, but do make good the crossing, for fear the king and all the people that are with him should be wiped out.’” 17 And Jonathan and Ahimaʽas were posted at ʽEn-Rogel, and the maid would go and bring word to them, and they would go and bring word to King David, because they could not be seen going into the city.
18 But a boy saw them and told Absalom; and they both hurried to the house of a man at Bahurim, who had a well in his courtyard, and they got down there, 19 and the woman took a mat and slid it over the top of the well and spread out pounded fruit on it, and nothing showed.
20 And Absalom’s officers came to the woman in the house and said “Where are Ahimaʽas and Jonathan?” and the woman said to them “They went over the water”; and they looked and did not find them, and went back to Jerusalem.
21 And after they had gone they came up out of the well and went and told King David “Up, go over the water quickly, because Ahithophel has been proposing such and such a policy against you”; 22 and David and all the people he had with him rose and went over the Jordan; by morning there was not a single one lacking that had not gone over the Jordan.
23 And Ahithophel saw that his policy was not followed, and he saddled his donkey and went off home to his city and made his will and hanged himself; and he was buried in his ancestral tomb.
24 And David came to Mahanaim.
And Absalom went over the Jordan, he and all the men of Israel with him; 25 and Absalom set ʽAmasa over the army in place of Joab; ʽAmasa was the son of a man named Ithra the Ishmaelite, who had gone in to Abigal the daughter of Nahash the sister of Joab’s mother Serujah.
26 And the Israelites and Absalom camped in Gilead.
27 And when David came to Mahanaim, Shobi the son of Nahash from Rabbah of the Bene-ʽAmmon, and Makir the son of ʽAmmiel from Lo-Debar, and Barzillai the Gileadite from Rogelim, 28 brought bedsteads and rugs and basins and crockery, and wheat and barley and meal and roasted grain and beans and lentils 29 and honey and butter and sheep and clotted cream, and offered it for eating to David and the people he had with him; for they thought “The people have grown hungry and faint and thirsty in the wilderness.”
18:1-33
18 And David held a muster of the people he had with him, and appointed over them captains of thousands and of hundreds; 2 and David divided the people into thirds, a third under Joab and a third under Joab’s brother Abishai the son of Serujah, and a third under Ittai the Gathite.
And David said to the people “I will go out with you myself”; 3 but the people said “You shall not; for if we run nothing will be thought of it, and if half of us die nothing will be thought of it, but you are equal to ten regiments of us; it is better now that we should have you in the city to help us.” 4 And the king said to them “I will do as you think best.”
And the king stood at the side of the gate while all the people went out by hundreds and thousands; 5 and the king gave Joab and Abishai and Ittai the order “Do be easy with my boy Absalom”; and all the people heard it when the king gave all the generals orders in regard to Absalom.
6 And the people went out in the field to meet the Israelites.
And the battle was fought in Ephraim Badlands; 7 and the people of Israel were defeated there by David’s soldiers, and the losses were heavy that day, twenty thousand men.
8 And the fighting was scattered all over the countryside there, and the Badlands ate up more of the people that day than the sword did.
9 And Absalom, riding on a mule, came in the way of David’s soldiers; and the mule got under the boughs of a great terebinth-tree, and his head caught in the tree, and he hung in the air, while the mule he was on went along.
10 And a man saw it and told Joab “‘Here, I saw Absalom hanging in the terebinth-tree.” 11 And Joab said to the man that told him “Here, you saw him’
and how came it you did not strike him to the ground there? and it would have been my business to give you ten shekels of silver and a belt.” 12 But the man said to Joab “And if I were weighing in my hand a thousand shekels of silver I would not lay hands on the prince, because in our hearing the king gave you and Abishai and Ittai the order ‘Look out for my boy Absalom.’ 13 Or had I played false with his life, nothing is hidden from the king, and you would have stood aloof.” 14 And Joab said “Then I will make a beginning for you,” and took three darts in his hand and drove them into Absalom’s heart, he being still alive in the midst of the tree; 15 and ten young men who were squires to Joab surrounded Absalom and hacked him to death.
16 And Joab blew the ram-horn, and the people came back from pursuing the Israelites; for Joab kept the people in hand.
17 And they took Absalom and threw him into the biggest sinkhole in the Badlands and reared a very large cairn of stones over him; and all Israel fled to their homes.
18 But during his life Absalom had taken and reared for himself the obelisk in the King’s Vale, because he thought “I have no son to commemorate my name,” and named the obelisk after himself; and it is called Absalom’s Hand to this day.
19 And Ahimaʽas the son of Sadok said “Let me run and bring the king the news that Jehovah has given him justice against his enemies.” 20 But Joab said to him “You are no man for news today; you shall carry news another day, but not today, seeing that the king’s son is dead”; 21 and Joab said to a Negro “Go tell the king what you have seen,” and the Negro did reverence to Joab and ran.
22 And again Ahimaʽas the son of Sadok said to Joab “Anyhow, let me too run after the Negro.”
And Joab said “What are you running for, son, when you have no welcome message?” 23 “Anyhow, let me run”
and he said to him “Run.”
And Ahimaʽas ran by the Pale road and got ahead of the Negro.
24 And David was sitting between the two gates; and the lookout went on the wall to the roof of the gate, and raised his eyes and saw that there was a man running alone.
25 And the lookout called and told the king; and the king said “If he is alone, there is news in his mouth.”
And he went on, coming nearer and nearer; 26 and the lookout saw another man running.
And the lookout called to the gate-ward “Here comes another man running alone”; and the king said “He too is bringing news.” 27 And the lookout said “It strikes me the first man’s running is like Ahimaʽas the son of Sadok’s”; and the king said “That is a good man, and will be coming for good news.”
28 And Ahimaʽas approached and said to the king “All right” and prostrated himself on the ground in reverence, and said “Blessed be your God Jehovah, who has defeated the men that raised their hands against your majesty.” 29 And the king said “The boy Absalom is all right?” and Ahimaʽas said “I saw great uproar when your majesty’s servant Joab sent your servant, but I did not know what.” 30 And the king said “Come around and stand here”; and he went around and stood; and up came the Negro.
31 And the Negro said “Good news for your majesty!
Jehovah has given you justice today against all that had stood up against you.” 32 And the king said to the Negro “Is the boy Absalom all right?” and the Negro said “May all your majesty’s enemies, and all who stand up against your majesty with evil intent, be as the boy is.” 33 And the king shook, and went up to the upper story of the gate and wept; and he said as he went “My son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! if only I had died instead of you, Absalom, my son, my son!”
19:1-43
19 And word was brought to Joab “The king is weeping and mourning for Absalom.” 2 And the victory turned to a mourning that day for all the men, because the men heard that day “The king is grieving for his son”; 3 and the men made their way into the city furtively as the humiliated men do when they have fled in battle; 4 and the king had wrapped his face and was crying out loudly “My son Absalom, my son, my son!”
5 And Joab went inside to the king and said “You have today shamed the faces of all your soldiers who have saved your life today and your children’s lives and the lives of your wives and concubines, 6 in loving those who hate you and hating those who love you; for you have informed us today that captains and soldiers are nothing to you; for I perceive today that if Absalom were alive and all of us dead today, then it would suit you.
7 But now get up and come out and say friendly things to your soldiers; for by Jehovah I swear, without going out you will not have a man stay with you over tonight, and that will be worse for you than all the bad things that have come over you from your boyhood to now.” 8 And the king rose and took his seat in the gate, and they told all the men “The king is sitting out in the gate”; and all the men came before the king.
But the Israelites fled to their homes.
9 And the people were all wrangling throughout the tribes of Israel, saying “The king delivered us from the clutch of our enemies; he rescued us from the clutch of the Philistines; and now he has fled out of the country out of Absalom’s way, 10 and Absalom whom we anointed over us is dead in battle,
now why are you deaf and dumb about bringing back the king?” 11 And King David sent to Priests Sadok and Abiathar the message “Tell the elders of Judah ‘Why should you be last in bringing home the king, when the talk of all Israel has reached the king? 12 You are my brothers, you are my flesh and blood, why should you be last in bringing back the king?’ 13 and to ʽAmasa say ‘You are my flesh and blood, you know; God do so to me, and more, if you shall not be general permanently in place of Joab in my service’”; 14 and he bent the hearts of all the men of Judah as if they had been one man, and they sent word to the king “Come back, you and all your soldiers.”
15 And the king came back, and arrived at the Jordan; and the Judahites had come to the Gilgal to go to meet the king, to take the king over the Jordan.
16 And Shimeʽi the son of Gera the Benjamite, of Bahurim, hastened down with the men of Judah to meet King David, 17 and with him a thousand men of Benjamin.
And Siba the servant of Saul’s family, and his fifteen sons and his twenty slaves with him, rushed to the Jordan before the king, 18 and went to fording it to take the king’s family over and to do what he pleased.
And Shimeʽi the son of Gera prostrated himself before the king as he came through the Jordan, 19 and said to the king “Do not charge me with crime, sir, nor remember how criminal your servant was on the day your majesty went out of Jerusalem and take note of it; 20 for your servant knows I did wrong, so here I have come today, the first of all the house of Joseph to come down to meet your majesty.” 21 And Abishai the son of Serujah answered “Does Shimeʽi get off for this, and not die because he cursed Jehovah’s anointed?” 22 but David said “What business have you sons of Serujah to play the marplot in my affairs today?
Put a man to death in Israel today, when I feel that I have become king over Israel today?” 23 and the king said to Shimeʽi “You shall not die.”
And the king swore to Shimeʽi.
24 And Saul’s descendant Meribaal had come down to meet the king, and had not attended to his feet nor his mustache, nor washed his clothes, from the day the king went till the day that he came in safety.
25 And when Meribaal came to meet the king, the king said to him.
“Why did you not go with me, Meribaal?” 26 and he said “Your majesty, my servant played me a trick; for your servant told him ‘Saddle me a donkey to ride on so that I can go with the king’ (because your servant is lame)
27 and he slandered your servant to your majesty.
But your majesty is like the angel of God; do as you think best.
28 For all my family had nothing but death to expect from your majesty, and you have put your servant among those who eat from your table; what further claim have I?”
and more crying out to the king.
29 And the king said to him “Why do you keep on with your talking?
I say you and Siba shall share the land.” 30 And Meribaal said to the king “He may take the whole so long as your majesty has come safe home.”
31 And Barzillai the Gileadite had come down from Rogelim and seen the king over the Jordan, taking leave of him at the Jordan.
32 Barzillai was very old, eighty years of age, and had provided the king with food during his stay at Mahanaim, for he was a very wealthy man; 33 and the king said to Barzillai “Come over with me yourself, and I will provide you with food in my company at Jerusalem”; 34 but Barzillai said to the king “How much time have I to live, that I should go up to Jerusalem with your majesty? 35 I am eighty today: can I tell good from bad, or does your servant taste what I eat and what I drink, or hear singers’ voices any longer? why should your servant be a burden to your majesty any longer? 36 Your servant will go barely over the Jordan with your majesty; but why should your majesty make me this return? 37 Let your servant go back and die in my city, by the graves of my father and my mother; but your servant Kimham will go over with your majesty; do by him as you think best”; 38 and the king said “Let Kimham go over with me, and I will do by him as you think best; and anything you propose to me I will do for you.” 39 And all the people went over the Jordan, and so did the king; and the king kissed Barzillai and said good-bye to him, and he went back to his own place.
40 And the king went over to the Gilgal, and Kimham went over with him; and all the people of Judah saw the king over, and half the people of Israel too.
41 And up came all the men of Israel to the king; and they said to the king “How came it that our brothers the men of Judah stole you and brought your majesty and his family over the Jordan, and all David’s men with him?” 42 And all the men of Judah rejoined to the men of Israel “Because we are next of kin to the king; what makes you get angry over this point? have we eaten from the king, or had allowances dealt out to us?” 43 And the men of Israel answered the men of Judah “Ten parts of the king belong to us, and we are senior to you too; how came it you slighted us? wasn’t our proposition first? it belongs to us to bring back the king”; and the talk of the men of Judah was stiffer than the talk of the men of Israel.
20:1-26
20 And there happened to be there a rascal named Shebaʽ the son of Bikri, a Benjamite; and he blew the ram-horn and said “We have no share in David, nor estate in Jesse’s son; to your homes, Israel!” 2 and all the men of Israel deserted David to follow Shebaʽ the son of Bikri.
But the men of Judah kept with their king from the Jordan to Jerusalem; 3 so David came home to Jerusalem.
And the king took the ten concubine wives he had left to keep the house and put them in a guarded house and furnished them food, but did not go in to them; so they were bottled up in grass-widowhood till the day of their death.
4 And the king said to ʽAmasa “Call out the men of Judah; be here in three days”; 5 and ʽAmasa went to call the Judahites out, but delayed beyond the date that was set for him.
6 And David said to Abishai “Now Shebaʽ the son of Bikri is going to be worse for us than Absalom was; take the palace troops yourself and pursue him, for fear he should have got fortified cities and should darken our eyes.” 7 And Joab and the Cretans and the Pletans and all the champions followed Abishai out from Jerusalem to pursue Shebaʽ the son of Bikri.
8 They were by the great stone at Gibeon when ʽAmasa came at the head of the people.
And Joab was belted with his brigandine (his garment), and over it belted with a sword fastened horizontally to his waist in its sheath; and it came out and fell down.
9 And Joab said to ʽAmasa “How are you, brother?” and with his right hand took hold of ʽAmasa’s beard to kiss him; 10 and, ʽAmasa not being on his guard against the sword in Joab’s hand, he stabbed him with it below the waist so that his entrails poured out on the ground, and he died without a second blow, while Joab and his brother Abishai pursued Shebaʽ the son of Bikri.
11 And one of Joab’s squires stood over him and said “Whoever likes Joab and whoever is for David, follow Joab!” 12 while ʽAmasa was wallowing in blood in the middle of the highway.
And the man saw that all the people halted; 13 and he moved ʽAmasa out of the highway into the field and threw a blanket over him, when he saw everybody who came to him halt.
When he was put out of the highway, everybody went on with Joab to pursue Shebaʽ the son of Bikri, 14 who went through all the tribes of Israel to Abel and Beth-Maʽacah and all the Berites; and they despised him, 15 and came after him, and came and besieged him in Abel-Beth-Maʽacah, and threw up a ramp toward the city, which topped the outwork, while all the people Joab had with him were mining to bring down the wall.
16 And a wise woman called out from the city “Listen, listen; tell Joab to come near here and let me speak to him”; 17 and he came near her.
And the woman said “Are you Joab?” and he said “Yes”; and she said to him “Listen to your servant’s words”; and he said “I am listening.” 18 And she said “In former times the word in Israel used to be ‘We will ask at Abel,’ and they closed a question so.
19 We are peaceable loyal Israelites; you are trying to end the life of a city, a mother in Israel; why would you wreck Jehovah’s estate?” 20 And Joab answered “Away, away with the thought that I should wreck or ravage; no such thing; 21 but a man from the highland of Ephraim, named Shebaʽ the son of Bikri, has raised his hand against King David.
Give up him alone, and I will raise the siege.”
And the woman said to Joab “You shall have his head thrown to you over the wall.” 22 And the woman spoke with her wisdom to all the city, and they cut off Shebaʽ the son of Bikri’s head and threw it to Joab, and he blew the ram-horn and the people dispersed to their homes.
And Joab went back to Jerusalem to the king.
23 And Joab was over the whole army, and Benajah the son of Jehojadaʽ over the Cretans and the Pletans, 24 and Adoniram superintendent of the corvée, and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud the private secretary, 25 and Shausha secretary for documents, and Sadok and Abiathar priests; 26 and ʽIra the Jairite too was priest to David.
21:1-22
21 And there was famine in David’s days for three years, year after year; and David betook himself to Jehovah; and Jehovah said “There is bloodguilt on Saul and his family for having put the Gibeonites to death.” 2 And the king called the Gibeonites and said to them
and the Gibeonites were not sons of Israel, but part of the remnant of the Amorites, and the sons of Israel had taken an oath to them, but Saul had tried to kill them off in his jealousy for the sons of Israel and Judah 3 David said to the Gibeonites “What shall I do for you, and by what shall I purge us and have you bless Jehovah’s estate?” 4 And the Gibeonites said to him “We have no silver or gold in the hands of Saul or his family, and we have nobody to put to death in Israel.” And he said “What do you say?
I will do it for you.” 5 And they said to the king “For the man who slaughtered us and who thought of rooting us out so that we should not stand our ground anywhere in the territory of Israel, 6 let seven men of his children be given us for us to shelve them up to Jehovah on Jehovah’s Mountain at Gibeon.”
And the king said “I will give them.”
7 And the king spared Meribaal the son of Saul’s son Jonathan on account of the oath by Jehovah that existed between them (between David and Saul’s son Jonathan); 8 but the king took the two sons of Rispah the daughter of Aijah whom she had borne to Saul, Armoni and Meribaal, and the five sons of Saul’s daughter Merab whom she had borne to ʽAdriel the son of Barzillai the Meholathite, 9 and gave them into the hands of the Gibeonites, who shelved them up on the mountainside before Jehovah; and they fell all seven at once, dying in the first days of harvest, at the beginning of barley-harvest.
10 And Rispah the daughter of Aijah took a sackcloth and made a bed of it on the stone from the beginning of harvest till water was poured down on them out of the sky, and did not let the birds of the air rest on them by day nor the beasts of the field at night.
11 And David was told what Saul’s concubine Rispah the daughter of Aijah had done; 12 and David went and took the bones of Saul and of his son Jonathan from the citizens of Jabesh in Gilead, who had stolen them from the square of Beth-Shan where the Philistines had hung them up at the time when the Philistines killed Saul at Gilboaʽ; 13 and he brought up from there the bones of Saul and of his son Jonathan, and they brought together the bones of the men who had been shelved up.
14 And they buried the bones of Saul and his son Jonathan, and of the shelved-up men, in the Benjamite country, in his father Kish’s grave at Selaʽ, and did everything that the king had ordered.
And after that Jehovah let himself be invoked for the country.
15 And the Philistines had a war with Israel again; and David went down, and his soldiers with him, and fought the Philistines.
And David grew faint; 16 and Ishbi-benob, who was among the breed of the ogre, and whose kein weighed three hundred shekels by bronze weight, and who was belted with a hadasha, thought to kill David; 17 but Abishai the son of Serujah came to his help and struck the Philistine dead.
Then David’s men swore to him “You shall not go with us out to battle again, so as not to put out the lamp of Israel.”
18 And after that there was the war at Gob with the Philistines again; then Sibbecai the Hushathite killed Saph, who was among the breed of the ogre.
19 And there was the war at Gob with the Philistines again; and Elhanan the son of Jaʽir the Bethlehemite killed Goliath the Gathite; the shaft of his spear was like a weaver’s pole.
20 And there was war at Gath again; and there was a tall man with six fingers on a hand and six toes on a foot, making twenty-four, he too was bred of the ogre,
21 who flouted the Israelites, and Jonathan the son of David’s brother Shimei killed him.
22 These four were bred of the ogre at Gath, and fell by the hands of David and of his soldiers.
22:1-51
22 And David addressed to Jehovah the words of this song on the day when Jehovah had delivered him out of the hands of all his enemies and of Saul:
2 Jehovah is my cliff and fastness, my preserver;
3 my God is my rock that I take refuge in, my shield and victorious horn, My citadel and refuge, my savior saving me from outrage.
4 I proclaim Jehovah a God to be praised, and am saved from my enemies.
5 Breakers of death have enveloped me, torrents of bale overwhelm me,
6 the cords of the world below have gone round me, death’s snares approached me,
7 In my distress I call on Jehovah, and to my God I cry, and he has heard my voice out of his palace, and my cry sounded in his ears.
8 And the earth rolled and shook,the sky’s foundations trembled and rolled because he was angry;
9 Smoke rose at his nostril, and fire out of his mouth devoured what it met; coals caught from it.
10 And he bent the sky and came down with thick air under his feet,
11 And mounted a cherub and flew, sped on the wings of the wind,
12 Made darkness his screen around him, his bower a clump of water, a cloud in the heavens;
13 coals of fire caught from his presence;
14 Jehovah thundered out of the skies, the Lord above uttered his voice,
15 And sent his arrows and scattered them, flashed lightning and threw them into confusion,
16 And the chasms of the sea came in sight,the foundations of the world were uncovered, At your rebuke, Jehovah,at a breath from your nostrils.
17 He has sent from on high and taken me, drawn me out of deep waters,
18 Delivered me from my enemy strong, from my haters when they were too much for me
19 They advanced on me in my day of calamity, but Jehovah was a stay to me,
20 And brought me out where I had room, rescuing me because he held me dear.
21 Jehovah gives me requital suitable to my honesty, return suitable to the cleanness of my hands,
22 Because I have kept Jehovah’s ways and not gone into wickedness from my God,
23 Because all his laws are present to my mind and his usages I do not set aside,
24 And I have been straightforward toward him and guarded against my offending nature;
25 And Jehovah has given me return suitable to my honesty, to the cleanness of my hands under his eyes.
26 With a godly man you deal friendlily; with a straightforward man, straightforwardly;
27 With a clean man, cleanly; and a dodger you outmaneuver,
28 And downtrodden people you save, and lofty eyes you bring down.
29 For you are my lamp, Jehovah, and my God lights up my darkness;
30 For by you I break a fence,by my God I leap a wall.
31 The Deity’s path is straightforward; Jehovah’s say is sterling; he is a shield to all who take refuge in him.
32 For who is God besides Jehovah? and who is a rock except our God?
33 The Deity it is that girds me with stoutness and makes my path straightforward,
34 Makes my feet like a wild doe’s and brings me to stand on heights,
35 Trains my hands for the battle till my arms break a bow of bronze.
36 And you have given me the shield of your aid, and your care makes me great;
37 You make my stride bold and my ankles do not turn.
38 I pursue my enemies and overtake them, and do not turn back till I have finished them.
39 I finish them, I batter them so that they do not rise, they fall under my feet.
40 And you have girded me with stoutness for the battle, you lay my adversaries low under me,
41 And give me my enemies’ backs;my haters I annihilate.
42 They cry and there is nobody to save them, cry to Jehovah and he does not answer them,
43 And I rub them fine like dust on the ground,like clay in the streets I beat them to powder.
44 And you have preserved me out of my people’s conflicts,guarded me for a head of nations; a people that I had not known shall serve me;
45 Foreigners cringe to me, upon hearsay they are at my orders;
46 Foreigners break up, are frightened out of their coverts.
47 Living is Jehovah, and blessed my Rock, and lofty my God of salvation,
48 The Deity who grants me vengeances and brings peoples down under me,
49 My preserver from my enemies; you uplift me above my adversaries, deliver me from the man of outrage.
50 Therefore I thank you, Jehovah, among the nations, and sing psalms to your name:
51 He greatly saves his king and befriends his anointed, David and his posterity forever.
23:1-39
23 And these are David’s last words: Quoth Jesse’s son David,quoth the man planted high, The anointed of Jacob’s God, the winsome psalmist of Israel,
2 Jehovah’s spirit spoke in me, and his say is on my tongue.
3 Jacob’s God said, Israel’s Rock told me, “A just ruler over men, who rules in the fear of God,
4 Uprises like morning light, the sun of a cloudless morning, By radiance brings up grass from the earth by rain.”
5 Is not my house so with the Deity? for he has made me a perpetual pledge,detailed and warranted,That all my success he will complete and will make all my pleasure thrive.
6 But reprobates are like loose thornbushes all of them, for not with hands are they taken,
7 But the man that touches them is provided with iron and spear-shaft, and they are burned up.
8 These are the names of the champions David had: Ishbaal the Hacmonite, head of the Three; he brandished his ax over eight hundred killed at one time.
9 And next to him Eleazar the son of Dodai, the Ahohite; he was among three champions with David at Pas-Dammim when the Philistines had come together there for war, and the men of Israel went up,
10 but he rose and killed Philistines till his arm was tired and his hand stuck fast to the sword; and Jehovah made a great victory that day, and the people came back after his work only to strip the fallen.
11 And next to him Shammah the son of Agee the Hararite; and the Philistines had come together at the Jawbone, and there was a field full of lentils there, and the people had fled from the Philistines;
12 and he took his stand in the middle of the field and rescued it, and defeated the Philistines; and Jehovah made a great victory.
13 And three of the Thirty went down at the beginning of harvest to David at the fastness of ʽAdullam, when a sept of Philistines was camping in Ghost Hollow:
14 David was in the fastness then, and the Philistine supporting-force was then at Bethlehem.
15 And David was taken with a craving, and said “I wish I had a drink of water out of the Bethlehem well at the gate”; 16 and the three champions burst through the Philistine camp and drew water out of the Bethlehem well at the gate and carried it away to David. But he would not drink it, but poured it out as an offering to Jehovah,
17 and said “Jehovah forbid the thought of my doing this: the blood of the men that went, with their lives in it?” and he would not drink it.
These things the three champions did.
18 And Abishai, brother to Joab the son of Serujah, was head of the Thirty; and he brandished his spear over three hundred killed, and used to be named among the Three.
19 He was more honored than the Three, and became captain over them, but he did not get into the Three.
20 And Benajah the son of Jehojadaʽ, a man of mettle and of many exploits, from Kabseel: it was he who killed the two Arels of Moab, and who went down and killed the lion in the well on the day of the snowstorm,
21 and who killed an Egyptian, a tall man, the Egyptian having a spear in his hand and he going down to him with a cudgel and snatching the spear out of the Egyptian’s hand and killing him with his own spear.
22 These things Benajah the son of Jehojadaʽ did, and used to be named among the Three Champions;
23 he was more honored than the Thirty, but did not get into the Three; but David gave him the right of private audience.
24 Joab’s brother ʽAsahel was among the Thirty; Elhanan the son of Dodo from Bethlehem;
25 Shammah the Harodite; Elika the Harodite; 26 Heles the Paltite; ʽIra the son of ʽIkkesh the Tekoʽite; 27 Abiezerthe ʽAnathothite; Sibbecai the Hushathite; 28 Salmon the Ahohite; Maharai the Netophathite; 29 Heled the son of Baʽanah the Netophathite; Ittai the son of Ribai from Gibeah of the Benjamites; 30 Benajah the Pireathonite; Hiddai from the Gaʽash ravines; 31 Abibaal the ʽArbathite; ʽAzmaveth the Bahrumite; 32 Eljahba the Shaʽalbonite; Jashen the Gunite; Jonathan 33 the son of Shammah the Hararite; Ahiam the son of Sharar the Hararite; 34 Eliphelet the son of Ahasbai the Beth-Maʽacathite; Eliʽam the son of Ahithophel the Gilonite; 35 Hesro the Carmelite; Pagharai the Arbite; 36 Igal the son of Nathan from Soba; Bani the Gadite; 37 Selek the ʽAmmonite; Naharai the Beerothite, squire to Joab the son of Serujah; 38 ʽIra the Jetherite; Gareb the Jetherite; 39 Urijah the Hittite; thirty-seven in all.
24:1-25
24 And Jehovah was again angry with Israel, and instigated David against them, prompting him to go and count Israel and Judah.
2 And the king said to Joab and the captains of the army “Canvass all the tribes of Israel, from Dan to Beer-Shebaʽ, and list the people, so that I may know the number of the people.” 3 And Joab said to the king “Jehovah your God make the people as many again and a hundred times as many again, while your majesty’s eyes see it; but why does your majesty have this desire?” 4 But David’s word overbore Joab and the captains of the army; and Joab and the captains of the army went out from the king’s presence to list the people, Israel.
5 And they crossed the Jordan and started at ʽAroʽer and the city in the middle of the arroyo, the Gadites on to Jaʽzer, 6 and came to Gilead and on to the Hittite cities at Kadesh, and came to Dan and ʽIjon, and went around great Sidon 7 and came to Tyre Fortress, and all the Hivvite and Canaanite cities, and came out in the Judahite South at Beer-Shebaʽ; 8 and they canvassed all the country, and at the end of nine months and twenty days they came to Jerusalem 9 and Joab gave the count of the census to the king.
And of Israel there were eight hundred thousand stalwart fighting men, and of the men of Judah there were five hundred thousand.
10 And David’s conscience pricked him after the enumeration of the people; and David said to Jehovah “I was very wrong in what I did; now, Jehovah, set your servant’s offense aside, for I did very foolishly.” 11 And when David rose in the morning, Jehovah’s word had come to the prophet Gad, David’s seer, saying 12 “Go tell David ‘Says Jehovah, I make you three propositions: choose one of them and have me do it to you.’” 13 And Gad came to David and told him, and said to him “Shall there come to you three years of famine in your country, or three months of flying before your foe, he pursuing you, or three days of pestilence in your country? now see and make up your mind what answer I shall return to the one who sent me.” 14 And David said to Gad “It is a very hard case; let us fall into Jehovah’s hands, because he has great kindliness; let me not fall into men’s hands”; 15 and David chose the pestilence.
And the season was that of wheat-harvest.
And the deaths had been among the people, and there had died of the people from Dan to Beer-Shebaʽ seventy thousand men, 16 and the angel had put out his hand to Jerusalem to ravage it, and Jehovah took the evil to heart and said to the ravaging angel “That will do; now hold your hand.”
And the Angel of Jehovah was by Ornah the Jebusite’s threshing-floor.
17 And David said to Jehovah, when he saw the angel that was striking among the people, “Here it is I who have sinned, I who am guilty, and these are the sheep; what have they done? let your hand be on me and my family.” 18 And Gad came to David that day and said to him “Go up and erect an altar to Jehovah on Ornah the Jebusite’s threshing-floor”; 19 and David went up in accordance with Gad’s words as directed by Jehovah.
20 And Ornah the Jebusite looked over and saw the king and his officers coming across to him, and Ornah went out and did reverence to David with his face to the ground.
21 And Ornah said “How is it your majesty comes to your servant?” and David said “To buy the threshing-floor from you, to build an altar to Jehovah and have the deaths among the people shut off.” 22 And Ornah said to David “Your majesty may take and offer what you think best: see here the cattle for the offering, and the threshing-boards and the woodwork of the team for fuel; 23 your majesty’s servant Ornah gives your majesty all.”
And Ornah said to the king “May your God Jehovah give you a favorable hearing.” 24 But the king said to Ornah “No, I will buy it of you at a price, and not offer my God Jehovah burnt-offerings that cost nothing”; and David bought the threshingfloor and the cattle for cash, fifty shekels.
25 And David built an altar to Jehovah there, and offered burnt-offerings and welfare-sacrifices, and Jehovah let himself be invoked for the country, and the deaths among Israel were shut off.
1 Kings
1:1-53
1 And when King David was an old man, far gone in years, they covered him with clothes, and he was not warm.
2 And his officers said to him “Let them look up a maiden girl for your majesty, and let her stand before your majesty to be a caretaker to him, and sleep in your arms that your majesty may be warm.” 3 And they looked for the most beautiful girl in all the territory of Israel, and found it to be Abishag the Shunammite, and brought her to the king.
4 And the girl, who was very beautiful, became caretaker to the king and waited on him, but the king did not know her.
5 And Adonijah the son of Haggith was ambitious and proposed to be king, and set up a carriage with outriders, and fifty men running before him.
6 (And his father had never since he was born crossed him by saying “How came you to do such a thing?”
And he too was very fine-looking; and he was born after Absalom.) 7 And he had dealings with Joab the son of Serujah and with Priest Abiathar, and they backed Adonijah’s party; 8 but Priest Sadok, and Benajah the son of Jehojadaʽ, and Nathan the prophet, and Shimei and Reʽi, and David’s champions, were not with Adonijah.
9 And Adonijah sacrificed sheep and cattle and a stall-fed calf by the Zoheleth stone alongside ʽEn-Rogel, and invited all his brothers and all the men of Judah, the king’s officers; 10 but Nathan the prophet, and Benajah and the champions, and his brother Solomon, he did not invite.
11 And Nathan said to Bath-Shebaʽ, Solomon’s mother, “You have heard, have you not, that Haggith’s son Adonijah is set up as king, without the knowledge of his majesty King David? 12 Come now, take my advice and save your life and your son Solomon’s life.
13 Go to the king’s room, and go in and say to him ‘Your majesty, did you not swear to your servant “Your son Solomon shall reign after me: he shall sit on my throne”? and how comes it that Adonijah has become king?’ 14 And while you are right there talking with the king I will come in after you and corroborate your words.” 15 And Bath-Shebaʽ went to the king in his room: the king had grown very old, and Abishag the Shunammite was waiting on the king; 16 and Bath-Shebaʽ bowed down and did reverence to the king, and the king said “What is the matter?” 17 And she said to him “Your majesty, you swore by your God Jehovah to your servant ‘Your son Solomon shall reign after me: he shall sit on my throne’; 18 and now here is Adonijah set up as king without your knowledge, your majesty, 19 and he has sacrificed a bull and a stall-fed calf and sheep in great numbers, and has invited all the princes and Priest Abiathar and General Joab, but not your servant Solomon
20 while it is on you, your majesty, that the eyes of all Israel are fixed to tell them who shall sit on your majesty’s throne after you.
21 And when your majesty goes to rest with your fathers I and my son Solomon will be criminals.”
22 And while she was still talking with the king, Nathan the prophet came.
23 And they told the king “Here is Nathan the prophet”; and he came in before the king and prostrated himself on the ground in reverence to the king.
24 And Nathan said “Your majesty, have you said ʽAdonijah shall reign after me: he shall sit on my throne’? 25 because he has gone down today and sacrificed a bull and a stall-fed calf and sheep in great numbers, and has invited all the princes and the generals and Priest Abiathar, and they are eating and drinking before him and have been saying ‘Long live King Adonijah!’ 26 But me your servant, and Priest Sadok, and Benajah the son of Jehojadaʽ, and your servant Solomon, he did not invite.
27 Is this thing of your majesty’s doing, and have you not let your servants know who was to sit on your majesty’s throne after you?”
28 And King David answered “Call in Bath-Shebaʽ.”
And she came in before the king and stood before the king.
29 And the king swore “By Jehovah, who has redeemed my soul out of every distress, 30 as I swore to you by Jehovah the God of Israel ‘Your son Solomon shall reign after me: he shall succeed me on my throne,’ so I will do this day.” 31 And Bath-Shebaʽ bowed her face to the ground and did reverence to the king, and said “May your majesty live forever.”
32 And King David said “Call in Priest Sadok and Nathan the prophet and Benajah the son of Jehojadaʽ.”
And they came in before the king.
33 And the king said to them “Take with you the palace troops, and mount my son Solomon on my own mule, and take him down to Gihon; 34 and there let Priest Sadok and Nathan the prophet anoint him king over Israel.
And blow the ram-horn, and say “Long live King Solomon!” 35 and come up behind him, and let him go in and take his seat on my throne; and he shall succeed me, he is the one I have appointed to be warden over Israel and over Judah.” 36 And Benajah the son of Jehojadaʽ answered the king “Amen; so may your majesty’s God Jehovah say! 37 As Jehovah has been with your majesty, so may he be with Solomon, and make his throne greater than your majesty’s!” 38 And Priest Sadok and Nathan the prophet and Benajah the son of Jehojadaʽ, and the Cretans and the Pletans, went down and mounted Solomon on King David’s mule and took him to Gihon; 39 and Priest Sadok took the horn of oil from the Tent and anointed Solomon, and they blew the ram-horn, and all the people said “Long live King Solomon!” 40 And all the people came up behind him, playing on flutes and making a great rejoicing, and the earth was splitting with their noise.
41 And Adonijah and all the guests he had with him had finished eating and heard it; and Joab heard the sound of the ram-horn and said “How comes the sound of the town in an uproar?” 42 He was still speaking when Jonathan the son of Priest Abiathar came; and Adonijah said “Come on, you are a gentleman and bring good news.” 43 And Jonathan answered Adonijah “Well, his majesty King David has made Solomon king; 44 and the king sent with him Priest Sadok and Nathan the prophet and Benajah the son of Jehojadaʽ, and the Cretans and the Pletans, and they mounted him on the king’s mule, 45 and Priest Sadok and Nathan the prophet anointed him king at Gihon, and they went up from there rejoicing, and the town was in an uproar; that was the sound you heard.
46 And Solomon has taken his seat on the royal throne.
47 And the king’s officers have gone in to take their leave of his majesty King David, saying ‘May your God make Solomon’s throne better than yours, and his throne greater than yours’; and the king did reverence on his couch.
48 And the king spoke thus: ‘Blessed be Jehovah the God of Israel, who has today given one to sit on my throne, with my eyes seeing it.’”
49 And all those guests of Adonijah’s were frightened, and rose to their feet, and went off in different directions; 50 and Adonijah was afraid of Solomon, and he went and took hold of the horns of the altar.
51 And Solomon was told “Adonijah is afraid of King Solomon; and he has laid hold of the horns of the altar, and says ‘Let King Solomon swear to me first not to kill his servant with the sword.’” 52 And Solomon said “If he will be an honest man not a hair of him shall fall to the ground; but if mischief is found in him he shall die.” 53 And King Solomon sent and had him brought down from the altar; and he went in and did reverence to King Solomon, and Solomon said to him “Go to your home.”
2:1-46
2 And the days for David’s death drew near, and he gave his son Solomon this charge: 2 “I am going the way of all the earth; be resolute, act the man, 3 and keep the charge of your God Jehovah, walking in his ways, keeping his usages, his commandments, his laws, his lessons, as written in the code of Moses, that you may do well in everything you do or undertake; 4 that Jehovah may make good his word that he spoke of me, ‘If your sons guard their ways, walking before me loyally with all their hearts and all their souls, you shall never be without a man on the throne of Israel.’
5 “And you know yourself what Joab the son of Serujah did to me, what he did to two generals of Israel, Abner the son of Ner and ʽAmasa the son of Jether, killing them and avenging war-blood in peace, and putting innocent blood on my belt that is round my waist and my shoes that are on my feet; 6 and you will do as your wisdom bids you and not have his gray hair go down to the world of the dead in peace.
7 And you will befriend the sons of Barzillai the Gileadite, and have them among those who eat at your table; for so they received me when I was in flight before your brother Absalom.
8 And you will have on hand Shimei the son of Gera the Benjamite from Bahurim: he cursed me with a virulent curse on the day that I went to Mahanaim; but he came down to meet me at the Jordan, and I swore to him by Jehovah ‘I will not put you to death by the sword.’ 9 Now do not let him go free: you are a wise man and will know what to do to him, and will send his gray hair down to the world of the dead in blood.”
10 And David went to rest with his fathers, and was buried in David’s City; 11 and the time that David had reigned over Israel was forty years: at Hebron he had reigned seven years, and at Jerusalem he had reigned thirty-three years.
12 And Solomon sat on the throne of his father David, and his kingship was thoroughly settled.
13 And Adonijah the son of Haggith came to Solomon’s mother Bath-Shebaʽ; and she said “Is all well?” and he said “Yes.” 14 And he said “I have something to speak of to you”; and she said “Speak.” 15 And he said “You know the kingship did belong to me, and all Israel were counting on me for king, but the kingship shifted and came to my brother because it was his from Jehovah; 16 now I am asking you for one thing
do not refuse me.”
And she said to him “Speak.” 17 And he said “Say a word to King Solomon (for he will not refuse you) and have him give me Abishag the Shunammite as wife.” 18 And Bath-Shebaʽ said “All right, I will speak to the king for you.” 19 And Bath-Shebaʽ came to King Solomon to speak to him for Adonijah, and the king rose at her coming and did reverence to her and sat down on his throne, and a throne was set for the king’s mother and she sat down at his right hand; 20 and she said “I want to ask one little favor of you; do not refuse me”; and the king said to her “Ask; I will not refuse you.” 21 And she said “Let your brother Adonijah be given Abishag the Shunammite for his wife.” 22 And King Solomon answered his mother “And why do you ask for Abishag the Shunammite for Adonijah? ask for the kingship for him, because he is my elder brother and has on his side Priest Abiathar and Joab the son of Serujah!” 23 And King Solomon swore by Jehovah “God do so to me, and more, but this word costs Adonijah his life.
24 And now, by Jehovah who established me and seated me on the throne of my father David, and who has given me a family as he promised, Adonijah shall die this day.” 25 And King Solomon sent Benajah the son of Jehojadaʽ, who cut him down; so he died.
26 And to Priest Abiathar the king said “Go to ʽAnathoth to your lands: you deserve death, but I will not put you to death today because you carried the ark of Jehovah before my father David, and because you went through all the hardships that my father went through”; 27 and Solomon ejected Abiathar from being priest to Jehovah, fulfilling Jehovah’s word that he spoke against ʽEli’s family at Shiloh.
28 And the report came to Joab
for Joab had swerved to follow Adonijah, though he had not to follow Absalom and Joab fled to Jehovah’s tent and took hold of the horns of the altar.
29 And King Solomon was told that Joab had fled to Jehovah’s tent and was beside the altar; and Solomon sent Benajah the son of Jehojadaʽ with the order “Go and cut him down.” 30 And Benajah went into Jehovah’s tent and said to him “By order of the king, come out.”
And he said “No, I will die here.”
And Benajah reported to the king “So spoke Joab, and so he answered me.” 31 And the king said to him “Do as he has spoken: cut him down and bury him, and take off from me and my family innocent blood that Joab shed; 32 and Jehovah will send his blood back on his own head, because he cut down two honest men who were better than he was, and killed them with the sword without the knowledge of my father David,
Abner the son of Ner, general of the army of Israel, and ʽAmasa the son of Jether, general of the army of Judah
; 33 and their blood shall come back on Joab’s head and on the heads of his descendants forever, and David and his descendants and house and throne shall have welfare forever from Jehovah.” 34 And Benajah the son of Jehojadaʽ went up and cut him down and killed him, and he was buried at his home in the wilderness; 35 and the king put Benajah the son of Jehojadaʽ in his place over the army, and in Abiathar’s place the king put Priest Sadok.
36 And the king summoned Shimei and said to him “Build yourself a house in Jerusalem and live there: you shall not go out from there to any place whatever, 37 and on the day when you do go out and cross Kidron Arroyo, know that you shall die; your blood will be on your own head.” 38 And Shimei said to the king “Very good: as your majesty has spoken your servant will do”; and Shimei lived in Jerusalem many days.
39 And at the end of three years two slaves of Shimei’s ran away to Akish the son of Maʽacah, the king of Gath; and people told Shimei “Your slaves are in Gath”; 40 and Shimei got up and saddled his donkey and went to Akish at Gath to look for his slaves.
And Shimei went and brought his servants from Gath, 41 and Solomon was told “Shimei has gone from Jerusalem to Gath and returned.” 42 And the king summoned Shimei and said to him “Did I not have you swear by Jehovah, and warn you ‘On the day when you go out and go to any place whatever, know that you shall die,’ and you said to me ‘Very good, I understand’? 43 and how comes it that you have not kept your oath by Jehovah and the command that I gave you?” 44 And the king said to Shimei “You know all the mischief that you are conscious of having done to my father David: Jehovah will send your mischief back on your own head, 45 and King Solomon shall be blessed and David’s throne shall be firm before Jehovah forever.” 46 And the king gave an order to Benajah the son of Jehojadaʽ, and he went out and cut him down; so he died.
3:1-28
3 And when the kingdom was settled in Solomon’s hands, Solomon made a matrimonial alliance with the Pharaoh, the king of Egypt, and took the Pharaoh’s daughter as his bride and brought her to David’s City till he should finish building his house and Jehovah’s house and the wall around Jerusalem.
2 Only the people sacrificed on the heights, because up to that date no house had been built for the name of Jehovah.
3 And Solomon loved Jehovah, going by his father David’s usages; only he sacrificed and made burnings on the heights.
4 And the king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there, because that was the greatest of the heights: a thousand burnt-offerings Solomon offered on that altar.
5 In Gibeon Jehovah appeared to Solomon in a dream by night; and God said “Ask for what you will have me give you.” 6 And Solomon said “You showed great tokens of friendliness to my father, your servant David, while he walked before you loyally and honestly and truly; and you kept in reserve for him this great piece of friendliness, and have given him a son sitting on his throne, as at this day.
7 Now, Jehovah my God, you have made your servant king in place of my father David, when I am a child and do not know how to go out and come in; 8 and your servant is surrounded by your chosen people, a great people, too great for the count to be taken or the number known: 9 give your servant a judicious mind to judge your people, to distinguish good from evil
for who is able to judge this vast people?” 10 And the words pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked this thing: 11 and God said to him “Since you have asked this thing, and have not asked to have many days nor to have wealth nor to have the lives of your enemies, but have asked to have discernment to hear causes, 12 I do as you said: I give you a mind so wise and discerning that there has never been one like you before you, and after you none like you shall arise.
13 And I also give you what you did not ask for, both wealth and glory, such that not a man among the kings has been like you.
14 And if you walk in my ways, keeping my usages and commandments, as your father David did, I will make your days long.” 15 And Solomon awoke and found it a dream; and he went into Jerusalem and stood before the ark of Jehovah’s covenant, and offered burnt-offerings and made welfare-sacrifices, and gave a banquet to his officers.
16 Then two women living in prostitution came to the king and stood before him, 17 and one woman said “O, sir, I and this woman live in one house; and I had a baby, in the house with her, 18 and two days after I had mine this woman had one too; and we were together, there was no stranger in the house with us, but we two in the house.
19 And this woman’s son died in the night, because she overlaid it; 20 and she got up in the middle of the night and took my son from beside me, while your servant was sound asleep, and took him to bed in her arms, and laid her dead son in mine.
21 And I got up in the morning to give my son the breast, and found him dead; but I looked him over carefully in the morning and found it was not my son that I had borne.” 22 And the other woman said “No, the life one is my son and the dead one is yours”; and they talked away before the king.
23 And the king said “This one says ‘this is my son, the live one, and the dead one is yours’; and that one says ‘no, the dead one is your son and the live one is mine’
”
24 And the king said “Get me a sword”; and they brought the sword before the king; 25 and the king said “Slice the live child in two and give half to one and half to the other.” 26 And the woman whose son the live child was said to the king (for she was in a fever of alarm for her son) “O, sir, give her the babe, don’t kill it”; but the other was saying “I don’t have it and you don’t either!
Slice!” 27 And the king answered “Give her the babe, don’t kill it; she is its mother.” 28 And all Israel heard of the judgment that the king had passed, and stood in fear of the king, because they saw that he had in him divine wisdom to do justice.
4:1-34
4 And King Solomon was king over all Israel.
2 And these are the ministers he had: ʽAzariah the son of Priest Sadok, 3 Elihoreph and Ahijah the sons of Shausha, secretaries for documents; Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud, the private secretary; 4 and Benajah the son of Jehojadaʽ, over the army; and Sadok and Abiathar, priests; 5 and ʽAzariah the son of Nathan, over the commissioners; and Zabud the son of Nathan, a priest, the king’s friend; 6 and Ahishar, steward of the palace; and Adoniram the son of ʽAbda, superintendent of the corvée.
7 And Solomon had twelve commissioners over all Israel, and they provisioned the king and his household, each being responsible for the provisioning for a month in the year.
he had Socoh and all the country of Hepher; 11 the son of Abinadab, all Naphath-Dor
Solomon’s daughter Taphath became his wife; 12 Baʽana the son of Ahilud, Taʽanac and Megiddo and all Beth-Shean, alongside Sarethan, below Jezreʽel, from Beth-Shean to Abel-Meholah, to beyond Jokmeam; 13 the son of Geber at Ramoth-Gilead he had the Havvoth of Jair the son of Manasseh, in Gilead; he had the Pale of Argob in the Bashan, sixty large cities with walls and bronze bars; 14 Ahinadab the son of ʽIddo at Mahanaim; 15 Ahimaʽas in Naphtali he too received Solomon’s daughter Basemath as wife; 16 Baʽana the son of Hushai in Asher and Baʽaloth; 17 Jehoshaphat the son of Paruah in Issacar; 18 Shimei the son of Ela in Benjamin; 19 Geber the son of Uri in the country of Gilead, the country of King Sihon of the Amorites and King ʽOg of the Bashan; and one chief over all the commissioners in the country.
20 Judah and Israel were numerous as the sand by the sea, eating and drinking and rejoicing.
21 And Solomon ruled all the kingdoms from the River to the country of the Philistines and to the boundary of Egypt, who presented tribute and were subject to Solomon all his life.
22 And Solomon’s provisions for one day were ten thousand quarts of farina and twenty thousand quarts of meal, 23 ten fat cattle and twenty range cattle and a hundred sheep, besides deer and gazelle and antelope and coop-fed waterfowl; 24 for he bore empire over everything across the River, from Tiphsah to Ghaza, and over all the kings across the River; and he had peace on all sides round about.
25 And Judah and Israel lived unafraid, each under his grapevine and his fig-tree, from Dan to Beer-Shebaʽ, throughout Solomon’s time; and throughout Solomon’s time nobody was hostile.
26 And Solomon had forty thousand teams of ponies for his chariots, and twelve thousand cavalry horses.
27 And these commissioners provisioned King Solomon and all who were in relations with King Solomon’s table, a month each; they let nothing be lacking.
28 And the barley and straw for the ponies and the blood-horses they brought to the place where it was to be, each as his duty was.
29 And God gave Solomon wisdom and very great intelligence, and a reach of brain like the sand on the seashore; 30 and Solomon’s wisdom exceeded that of the Eastern Beduins and all that of the Egyptians: 31 he was the wisest of all men, wiser than Ethan the Ezrahite or Heman and Calcol and Dardaʽ the sons of Mahol; and he was talked of among all the nations round about.
32 And he spoke three thousand proverbs, and his songs were a thousand and five.
33 And he spoke of trees and shrubs, from the cedar in the Lebanon to the marjoram that comes out on the wall; and he spoke of animals, those that walk and those that fly and those that crawl and those that swim.
34 And out of all the peoples they came to listen to Solomon’s wisdom, from all the kings on earth, who had heard of his wisdom.
5:1-18
5 And King Hiram of Tyre sent his representatives to Solomon, because he had heard that they had anointed him king as his father’s successor; for Hiram had always been friendly to David.
2 And Solomon sent word to Hiram 3 “You know my father David was not able to build a house for the name of his God Jehovah on account of the fighting with which he was surrounded, until Jehovah put them under his feet.
4 Now my God Jehovah has given me rest on all sides: there is no antagonist and no misadventure; 5 and I am thinking of building a house to the name of my God Jehovah, as Jehovah predicted to my father David ‘Your son whom I will put on your throne as your successor, he shall build the house for my name.’ 6 Now give orders to have them cut me cedars from the Lebanon, my subjects being there with yours, and I paying you the wages of your subjects just as you shall say, because you know yourself that there is not among us a man who knows how to cut timber like the Phenicians.”
7 And when Hiram heard Solomon’s message he was much pleased, and said “Blessed be Jehovah today for having given David a wise son over this great people”; 8 and Hiram sent word to Solomon “I have listened to what you sent to me: I will do all you want in the matter of cedar timber and cypress timber; 9 my servants shall bring them down from the Lebanon to the sea, and I will make them into rafts and take them by sea to the place you send me word of, and break them up there, and you shall take them away; and you shall do what I want in the matter of furnishing food for my household.” 10 So Hiram furnished Solomon cedar timber and cypress timber, all he wanted, 11 and Solomon furnished Hiram two hundred thousand bushels of wheat as provision for his household, and two thousand gallons of beaten oil; such an amount Solomon furnished to Hiram year by year.
12 And Jehovah gave Solomon wisdom, as he had promised to him.
And there was peace between Hiram and Solomon, and the two made a treaty.
13 And Solomon raised a corvée from all Israel: the corvée was thirty thousand men; 14 and he sent them to the Lebanon, ten thousand a month by shifts: they were on the Lebanon a month and at home two months; and Adoniram was over the corvée.
15 And Solomon had seventy thousand porters carrying loads, and eighty thousand woodcutters cutting on the mountain, 16 besides Solomon’s chief commissioners who were over the work, thirty-three thousand of them, who were in authority over the people that were doing the work.
17 And the king ordered the quarrying of great stones, fine stones, to give the house a dressed-stone foundation; 18 and Solomon’s builders and Hiram’s builders and the Gebalites shaped them and got the timber and stone ready for building the house.
6:1-38
6 And in the four hundred and eightieth year since the sons of Israel had come out of Egypt, in the fourth year, blossom moon (second month), of Solomon’s reign over Israel, he built the house for Jehovah.
2 And the house King Solomon built for Jehovah was ninety feet long and thirty wide, and forty-five feet high; 3 and the porch on the nave side of the house was thirty feet long in the direction of the breadth of the house, and fifteen feet wide in the direction of the length of the house.
4 And he made the house windows with closed frames; 5 and he built against the wall of the house a girdle round the walls of the house, round the nave and the shrine, and made by-rooms around it.
6 (The undermost by-room was seven and a half feet wide, and the middle one nine feet, and the third ten and a half feet; for he gave the house offsets around it on the outside, to avoid taking a hold in the walls of the house; 7 and the house, when it was built, was built of entire stone as quarried, and hammer or pick or any iron tool was never heard in the house while it was being built.) 8 The door of the undermost by-room was at the southeast corner of the house, and they went up by trapdoors to the middle one, and from the middle to the third.
9 And he built the house and finished it, and roofed the house with cedar timber, beams and boards; 10 and he built the girdle against the whole house, seven and a half feet in height, and attached it to the house with cedar girders.
11 And Jehovah’s word came to Solomon, 12 “This house which you are building
if you go by my usages and live up to my laws and keep all my commandments, going by them, I will make good with you my promise that I gave to your father David, 13 and will dwell among the sons of Israel and not leave my people Israel.”
14 And Solomon built the house and finished it, 15 and built the walls of the house on the inside with cedar planks; from the floor of the house to the girders of the ceiling he lined with wood, and he floored the house with cypress planks.
16 And he built thirty feet at the back of the house with cedar planks from floor to girders, and finished it on the inside as a shrine, holiest of the holy; 17 and sixty feet was the house (that is, the nave) in front of the shrine.
18 And there wash cedar on the house inside, carving of gourds and open flowers, all cedar, no stone visible.
19 And he arranged a shrine inside, within the house, to put the ark of Jehovah’s covenant in.
20 The shrine was thirty feet in length and thirty feet in breadth and thirty feet in height; and he gilded it all over.
21 And he made a cedar altar in front of the shrine, and gilded it.
22 And he gilded the whole house, every bit of it, and gilded the shrine’s whole altar.
23 And in the shrine he made two cherubs of wild olive wood: the height of the first cherub was fifteen feet, and so was the second cherub, fifteen feet was its height; 24 and seven and a half feet was the cherub’s first wing and seven and a half feet the cherub’s second wing, fifteen feet from tip to tip of its wings, 25 and fifteen feet the second cherub; 26 both cherubs had the same dimensions and the same shape.
27 And he put the cherubs into the inner house; and they spread out their wings, and the wing of the one touched the wall, and the wing of the other cherub the other wall, and the wings touched each other in the middle of the house; 28 and he gilded the cherubs.
29 And he carved all the walls of the house around with intaglio carvings of cherubs and palm trees and open flowers, for the inner house and the outer.
30 And the floor of the house he gilded, for the inner house and the outer.
31 And at the entrance of the shrine he made wild-olive-wood doors, the jambs pentagonal posts; and two wild-olive-wood doors, 32 which he carved with cherubs and palm trees and open flowers, and gilded them, and rammed over the cherubs and palm trees the gold.
33 And in the same way he made for the entrance of the nave wild-olive-wood posts, square posts, 34 and two cypress doors, two folding leaves to one door and two folding leaves to the other door; 35 and he carved them with cherubs and palm trees and open flowers, and gilded them with gold trimmed to fit the design.
36 And he built the inner court in three courses of dressed stone and one of blocks of cedar.
37 In the fourth year the foundation was laid for Jehovah’s house, in the blossom moon; 38 and in the eleventh year, in the Bul moon (that is, the eighth month), the house was finished in every detail in full accordance with its plan. And he was building it seven years.
7:1-51
7 And Solomon built at his own house thirteen years, and finished his house entirely.
2 And he built the Forest-of-Lebanon house, a hundred and fifty feet long and seventy-five feet wide and forty-five feet high, on four rows of cedar pillars with blocks of cedar on top of the pillars, 3 roofed with cedar over the chambers on top of the pillars, forty-five of them, fifteen to the row; 4 with beams three rows, and loophole to loophole three times, 5 and all the doors and loopholes square-framed, and loophole facing loophole three times.
6 And he made the colonnade seventy-five feet long and forty-five wide, and a porch parallel to it, and parallel to them a platform with pillars; 7 and he made the throne-porch where he sat as judge, the judgment-porch, wainscoted with cedar from floor to girders.
8 And his own house, where he was to live, the other court inside the porch, was done like that; and he builds a house for the Pharaoh’s daughter whom Solomon married, like this porch.
9 All these were expensive stone, dressed to measure, saw-cut on the outside and the inside and from foundation to coping, and from the court of Jehovah’s house to the great court, 10 the foundations laid in expensive stones of great size, fifteen-foot stones and twelve-foot stones, 11 and above expensive stones, dressed to measure, and cedar.
12 And the great court, all around, was three courses of dressed stone and one of blocks of cedar, for the inner court of Jehovah’s house and for the court of the palace porch.
13 And King Solomon sent and fetched Hiram from Tyre.
14 He was the son of a widow of the tribe of Naphtali, and his father was a Tyrian, a bronze-worker; and he was full of talent and sense and skill for doing all kinds of work in bronze; and he came to King Solomon and did all his work.
15 And he cast the two bronze pillars, twenty-seven feet the height of one pillar and eighteen feet its girth and three inches the thickness of the metal (hollow), and so the other pillar; 16 and he made two capitals to put on the tops of the pillars, cast in bronze, seven and a half feet the height of one capital and seven and a half feet the height of the other capital; 17 and he made two nettings, network, tracery, meshwork, to cover the capitals on the tops of the pillars, a netting for the one capital and a netting for the other capital.
18 And he made the pomegranates; and there were two rows of bronze pomegranates around the one netting, and two hundred pomegranates in two rows surrounding the one capital; and so he did for the other capital.
19 And the capitals on the tops of the pillars were of lily pattern, in the porch, six feet; 20 and there were capitals on the two pillars above too, next the swelling beyond the netting.
21 And he set up the pillars with the nave porch: he set up the right-hand pillar and named it Jakin, and set up the left-hand pillar and named it Boaz.
22 And on the tops of the pillars was a lily pattern.
So the work of the pillars was finished.
23 And he made the sea, a casting fifteen feet from lip to lip, circular in outline, seven and a half feet high and forty-five feet in girth; 24 and gourds all around it under its lip, fifteen feet; the gourds were in two rows, cast in one piece with it.
25 It stood on twelve cattle, three facing north and three facing west and three facing south and three facing east, with the sea up on top of them, and their hinder parts all inward.
26 And it was three inches thick, with its lip made like the lip of a cup, a lily-bud; and it would hold twenty thousand gallons.
27 And he made the stands, ten of them, of bronze: one stand was six feet long and six wide and four and a half high.
28 And this was the pattern of a stand: they had borders, and borders between the frames; 29 and on the borders between the frames there were lions, cattle, and cherubs, and so at the top on the frames; and under the lions and cattle spirals in a downward-sloping pattern.
30 And a stand had four bronze wheels, and bronze axles; and its four uprights had shoulder-pieces; the shoulder-pieces were cast under the laver, spirals opposite each.
31 And its mouth was inside the shoulder-pieces and above, eighteen inches; and its mouth was round, in pedestal pattern, twenty-seven inches; and on its mouth too there were carvings; and their borders were square, not round.
32 And the four wheels were below the borders, and the spindles of the wheels went into the stand; and the height of a wheel was twenty-seven inches.
33 And the pattern of the wheels was like that of a chariot-wheel; their spindles, rims, spokes, and hubs, all were cast.
34 And there were four shoulder-pieces on the four corners of a stand: the shoulder-pieces were in one piece with the stand.
35 And at the top of the stand there was a pedestal, nine inches in height, round in contour. Its arms and borders were in one piece with it.
36 And he engraved on the plates cherubs, lions, and palm trees according to the room on each, and spirals around the edges.
37 Like this he made the ten stands; all of them had the same metal, the same dimensions, and the same shape.
38 And he made ten bronze lavers holding four hundred gallons each and measuring six feet each, the ten stands having a laver on each; 39 and he put the stands five along the right side of the front of the house and five along the left side of the front of the house, and the sea he put east of the southeast corner of the house.
40 And Hiram made the pots and the shovels and the bowls; and Hiram finished doing all the work he did for King Solomon in Jehovah’s house: 41 two pillars, and the globes of the capitals on top of the pillars, two of them; and the nettings, two of them, to cover the two globes of the capitals on top of the pillars; 42 and the pomegranates, four hundred of them, for the two nettings, two rows of pomegranates to a netting, to cover the two globes of the capitals on top of the pillars; 43 and the stands, ten of them, and the lavers, ten of them, on the stands; 44 and the one sea, and the cattle, twelve of them, under the sea; 45 and the pots and the shovels and the bowls. And all these furnishings that Hiram made for King Solomon in Jehovah’s house were polished bronze.
46 It was in the Pale of the Jordan that he cast them, in the heavy soil between Succoth and Sarethan.
47 And Solomon left all these furnishings, because of their great number, without investigation of the weight of the bronze.
48 And Solomon made all the furnishings Jehovah’s house had in it: the golden altar, and the table the showbread was on, gold, 49 and the lampstands, five on the right and five on the left in front of the shrine, solid gold, 50 and the buds and the lamps and the pincers, gold, and the basins and the snuffers and the bowls and the pans and the firepans, solid gold, and the hinges for the doors of the inner house, the holiest of the holy, and for the doors of the house, the nave, gold.
51 And all the work King Solomon did on Jehovah’s house was finished; and Solomon brought in his father David’s consecrated articles, the silver and the gold, and put the furnishings in the treasuries of Jehovah’s house.
8:1-66
8 Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel at Jerusalem to bring up the ark of Jehovah’s covenant from David’s City (that is, Sion) 2 in the moon of the permanent streams; 3 and the priests took up the ark, 4 and they brought up the ark and the Tent of Meeting, and all the consecrated furnishings that there were in the tent, 5 while the king and all Israel were in front of the ark sacrificing sheep and cattle too many for the count to be taken or the number known.
6 And the priests brought the ark in to its place in the shrine of the house, in the holiest of the holy, under the cherubs’ wings; 7 for the cherubs spread out two wings over the place for the ark, and over-arched the ark and its poles, 8 but the poles were long, and the heads of the poles were seen from the holy place along the front of the shrine, but were not seen outside; and they are there to this day.
9 There was nothing at all in the ark but the two stone tablets that Moses put there at Horeb, that Jehovah covenanted with the sons of Israel when they came out of Egypt.
10 And when the priests came out of the holy place the cloud filled Jehovah’s house, 11 and the priests could not stand to officiate because of the cloud, because Jehovah’s glory filled Jehovah’s house.
12 Then Solomon said “The sun shows in the sky,
but Jehovah lists to dwell in darkling air. 13 I have builded a hall for you,
an abode for you forever.”
14 And the king turned around and blessed all the assembly of Israel while all the assembly of Israel stood; 15 and he said “Blessed be Jehovah the God of Israel, who said with his mouth to my father David and has with his hands made it good, 16 ‘Since the day that I brought my people Israel out of Egypt I had not chosen a city out of any of the tribes of Israel for building a house where my name should be; but I have chosen Jerusalem where my name should be, and I have chosen David to be over my people Israel.’ 17 And my father David had in mind to build a house for the name of Jehovah the God of Israel; 18 but Jehovah said to my father David ‘Whereas you had in mind to build a house for my name, you did well to have it in mind; 19 yet you shall not build the house, but your son, who comes out of your loins, he shall build the house for my name.’ 20 And Jehovah has been as good as his word, and I have risen in place of my father David and have taken my seat on the throne of Israel as Jehovah promised, and have build the house for the name of Jehovah the God of Israel, 21 and have established there a place for the ark where Jehovah’s covenant is, which he made with our fathers when he brought them out of Egypt.”
22 And Solomon stood before the altar of Jehovah in the presence of all the assembly of Israel, and spread out his hands to the sky, 23 and said “Jehovah, God of Israel, there is not a God like you in the heavens above and on earth below, keeping covenant and friendship with your servants who walk before you with all their hearts, 24 seeing you have kept your word with my father David and spoken with your mouth and made good with your hands as this day.
25 And now, Jehovah, God of Israel, keep with your servant my father David your word You shall never be without a man before me who shall sit on the throne of Israel, if only your sons guard their ways, walking before me as you did’; 26 now, Jehovah, God of Israel, let your word to your servant my father David prove true.
27 “But will God really live on earth? why, the skies and the skies of the skies cannot contain you, much less this house that I have built; 28 but turn to your servant’s prayer and petition, Jehovah my God, listening to the appeal and prayer that your servant is praying before you today, 29 that your eyes be open toward this house night and day, toward the place where you have said your name shall be, listening to the prayer that your servant prays toward this place, 30 and that you listen to the petition of your servant and of your people Israel that they pray toward this place, and that you hear up to your dwelling-place heaven, and, listening, forgive.
31 “In case a man does wrong by his neighbor, and he has raised a curse on him, cursing him out, and comes and pronounces the curse before your altar in this house, 32 and you hear it up to heaven, act and judge your servants, condemning the knave, sending retribution upon his head, and vindicating the man who stands for his rights, sending to him what he deserves.
33 “When your people Israel, sinning against you, are beaten by an enemy, but come back to you and confess your name, and pray and beseech you in this house, 34 and you hear it up to heaven, forgive the sin of your people Israel, and bring them back to the soil you gave to their fathers.
35 “When the sky is barred and there is no rain, because they sin against you, and they pray toward this place and confess your name and come back from their sins, because you afflict them, 36 and you hear it up to heaven, forgive the sin of your servants and your people Israel, when you guide them on the good path that they are to walk in, and give rain on your country which you gave to your people as a domain.
37 “When famine there is in the country, when pestilence there is, when on the grain there is blasting or mildew, spring grasshoppers, fall grasshoppers, when their enemies beset them in any of their gates, in every calamity, in every malady, 38 whatever prayer or petition anybody may have, each feeling the blow that strikes his own heart and spreading out his hands toward this house, 39 and you hearing it up to heaven your dwelling-place, forgive and act and give to each as he deserves, as you know his heart (for you alone know the hearts of all human beings), 40 that they may fear you all the time they live over the soil you gave their fathers.
41 “And as to the foreigner too, who does not belong to your people Israel, but comes from a distant country drawn by your name 42 (because they will hear of your great name and of your strong hand and outstretched arm) and comes and prays toward this house, 43 and you hear it up to heaven your dwelling-place, do as the foreigner may call on you to, in order that all the peoples of the earth may know your name, fearing you like your people Israel and knowing that this house I have built wears your name.
44 “When your people go out to war against their enemies on a course you send them on, and pray to Jehovah toward the city you have chosen and the house I have built for your name, 45 and you hear up to heaven their prayer and petition, do justice for them.
46 When they sin against you (for there is no man who does not sin) and you are angry with them and give them to be defeated before an enemy, and their captors carry them as slaves to an enemy’s country, far or near, 47 and in the country to which they are carried off they bethink themselves and come back and beseech you in their captors’ country, saying ‘We have sinned and offended, we are guilty,’ 48 and come back to you sincerely and wholeheartedly in the country of their enemies who carried them off, and pray to you toward their country that you gave to their fathers, the city you have chosen, and the house I have built for your name, 49 and you hear their prayer and petition up to heaven your dwelling-place, do justice for them 50 and forgive their sins and crimes that they have committed against you, and make them objects of sympathy to their captors that they may be kindly treated 51 because they are your people and your estate, whom you brought out of Egypt, out of the blast-furnace;
52 that your eyes be open to the petition of your servant and of your people Israel, to listen to them in that they call on you for, 53 because you have set them apart, as an estate for yourself, out of all the peoples of the earth, as you promised by your servant Moses when you brought our fathers out of Egypt, Lord Jehovah.”
54 And when Solomon had finished offering to Jehovah all this prayer and petition, he rose from kneeling before Jehovah’s altar, with his hands spread out to the sky, 55 and stood and blessed all the assembly of Israel in a loud voice, saying 56 “Blessed be Jehovah, who has given rest to his people just as he promised; of all the good promise than he gave by his servant Moses not one point has failed.
57 Jehovah our God be with us as with our fathers, not leaving us nor abandoning us, 58 to bend our hearts to him for walking in his ways and for keeping his commandments and usages and laws that he enjoined upon our fathers; 59 and may these words of mine in which I have made my petition before Jehovah be near to Jehovah our God day and night, that he do justice for his servant and for his people Israel day by day 60 that all the peoples of the earth may know that Jehovah is God, there is none besides.
61 And let your hearts be at one with Jehovah your God for going by his usages and for keeping his commandments, as they are this day.”
62 And the king, and all Israel with him, were making sacrifice before Jehovah; 63 and Solomon sacrificed, of the welfare-sacrifice he offered to Jehovah, twenty-two thousand horned cattle and a hundred and twenty thousand sheep and goats; and the king and all the sons of Israel dedicated Jehovah’s house.
64 On that day the king consecrated the middle of the court in front of Jehovah’s house, because there he offered the burnt-offering and the grain-offering and the fats of the welfare-sacrifices, since the bronze altar before Jehovah was too small to hold the burnt-offering and the grain-offering and the fats of the welfare-sacrifices.
65 And at that time Solomon kept the Feast, and all Israel with him, a great assembly, from Lebo-Hamath to Egypt Arroyo, before Jehovah our God for seven days.
66 And on the eighth day he dismissed the people, and they took leave of the king and went to their homes joyous and merry over all the good things Jehovah had done for his servant David and his people Israel.
9 And when Solomon had finished building Jehovah’s house and the royal palace and all Solomon’s fancies that he was pleased to make, 2 Jehovah appeared to Solomon a second time as he had at Gibeon; 3 and Jehovah said to him “I have heard your prayer and petition that you have made before me: I have done just as you prayed, I have made this house that you have built a sacred place, putting my name there forever; and my eyes and my mind shall always be there.
4 And for yourself, if you walk before me as your father David did, in integrity of heart and in uprightness, doing just as I have commanded, and keep my usages and laws, 5 I will set up the throne of your kingship over Israel forever, as I promised your father David ‘You shall never be without a man on the throne of Israel.’ 6 If you, yourselves and your sons, shall turn back from following me and not keep my commandments and usages that I have set before you, and go and worship other gods and do them reverence, 7 I will stamp out Israel from over the soil I gave them, and the house I had made a sacred place for my name I will discard, and Israel shall become a byword and a jeer among all peoples.
8 And this house shall become a ruin; everyone who passes it shall stand aghast and whistle, and they shall say ‘On what account did Jehovah do like that to this country and this house?’ 9 and they will say ‘On account of their having left their God Jehovah, who had brought their fathers out of Egypt, and taken to other gods and done reverence to them and worshiped them; it was on this account that Jehovah brought upon them all this mischief.’”
10 And at the end of the twenty years in which Solomon had been building the two houses, Jehovah’s house and the royal palace, King 11 Hiram of Tyre had been accommodating Solomon with cedar and cypress timber and gold, as much as he liked,
then King Solomon gave Hiram twenty cities in the Marchland.
12 And Hiram went out from Tyre to see the cities Solomon had given him, and was not suited with them; 13 and he said “What sort of cities are these you have given me, brother?” and called them the Cabul country, a name they bear to this day.
14 And Hiram sent the king sixteen thousand pounds of gold.
15 And these were the terms of the corvée King Solomon raised for building Jehovah’s house and his own house, and the Millo and the wall of Jerusalem, and Hasor and Megiddo and Gezer
16 the Pharaoh, the king of Egypt, had gone up and taken Gezer and burned it down, and killed the Canaanites who lived in the city, and given it as a dowry to his daughter, Solomon’s bride, 17 and Solomon had Gezer rebuilt
and Nether Beth-Horon 18 and Baʽalath and Tamar in the wilderness, in our country, 19 and all the storage cities Solomon had, and the chariot cities and the cavalry-horse cities, and Solomon’s fancies that he took the fancy to build in Jerusalem and in the Lebanon and throughout his dominion: 20 all the people that were left of the Amorites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Hivvites, and the Jebusites, who were not sons of Israel,
21 their sons that had been left in the country after them, whom the sons of Israel had not been able to dispatch, Solomon levied as a laboring corvée, which they are to this day.
22 But of the sons of Israel Solomon enslaved none, but they were his men of war and his officials and captains and adjutants and chariot-captains and horsemen.
23 These were Solomon’s chief commissioners over the work, five hundred and fifty of them who were in authority over the people that were doing the work.
24 Only the Pharaoh’s daughter has gone up out of David’s City to her house that Solomon has built for her.
Then he built the Millo. 25 And Solomon offers burnt-offerings and welfare-sacrifices three times a year on the altar he has built to Jehovah, that stands before Jehovah, and is finishing the house.
26 And King Solomon built ships at Ghesjon-Geber near Elath on the shore of the Red Sea, in Edom; 27 and Hiram sent on the ships his subjects, shipmen familiar with the sea, with Solomon’s subjects; 28 and they reached Ophir and got gold there, fifty-five thousand pounds of it, and brought it to King Solomon.
10:1-29
10 And the queen of Sheba heard of Solomon in the fame of Jehovah, and came to test him with problems.
2 And she came to Jerusalem with an immense retinue, camels carrying spices and a vast quantity of gold, and precious stones; and she came to Solomon and said to him whatever she had in mind to say, 3 and Solomon told her all her points; there was not a point of which the king was ignorant and did not tell her.
4 And the queen of Sheba saw all Solomon’s wisdom, and the house he had built, 5 and the food that came to his table, and the order in which his officers sat and his attendants stood, and the attendants’ costumes, and his drinks, and his burnt-offering that he used to offer in Jehovah’s house, and she had no spirit left in her; 6 and she said to the king “It was a true word that I heard in my own country about your state and your wisdom; 7 and I did not believe the talk till I came and saw with my own eyes, and found that I had not been told half: in wisdom and prosperity you outdo the report I had heard.
8 Happy are your wives, happy these officers of yours who stand before you always, who hear your wisdom.
9 Jehovah your God be blessed, who was pleased with you for setting on the throne of Israel; it was in an eternal love of Jehovah’s for Israel that he made you king to do justice and right.” 10 And she gave the king sixteen thousand pounds of gold, and spices in great quantity, and precious stones; there never again came spices in such quantity as that stock that the queen of Sheba gave King Solomon.
11 (And Hiram’s ships too, that carried gold from Ophir, brought from Ophir almug wood in great quantity, and precious stones; 12 and the king made the almug wood into furniture for Jehovah’s house and the royal palace, and lyres and harps for the singers; almug wood never came like that, nor was seen, to this day.) 13 And King Solomon gave the queen of Sheba everything which pleased her that she asked for, besides what he gave her in accordance with King Solomon’s custom; and she turned back and went to her own country, she and her officers.
14 And the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was eighty-seven thousand six hundred and forty pounds, gold, 15 besides the mulcts on travelers and the profits of traders and of all the kings of the frontier tribes and the viceroys of the country.
16 And King Solomon made two hundred shields of beaten gold, three hundred ounces of gold going on one shield, 17 and three hundred beaten gold bucklers, a hundred and fifty ounces of gold going on one buckler; and the king put them in the Forest-of-Lebanon house.
18 And the king made a great ivory throne and gilded it with refined gold; 19 there were six steps to the throne, and the throne had calves’ heads at the back, and arms on each side of the seat, and two standing lions beside the arms, 20 and twelve standing lions on the six steps, one each side; nothing of the sort had been made for any kingdom.
21 And all Solomon’s drinking-vessels were gold, and all the utensils of the Forest-of-Lebanon house were solid gold; no silver, it was not thought anything of in Solomon’s days.
22 For the king had Spain-ships at sea with Hiram’s ships: once in three years the Spain-ships came in, carrying gold and silver, ivory and monkeys and peacocks.
23 And Solomon surpassed all the kings of the earth in wealth and wisdom; 24 and all the earth betook themselves to Solomon to listen to his wisdom which God had put into his heart, 25 and brought their presents man by man, articles of silver and of gold and garments and arms and spices, ponies and mules, a yearly supply.
26 And Solomon amassed chariots and horses, and had fourteen hundred chariots and twelve thousand horses, which he quartered in the chariot cities and at Jerusalem with the king.
27 And the king made silver as plentiful in Jerusalem as stones, and cedar as sycamores in the lowlands.
28 And Solomon’s sources of supply for ponies were Egypt and Kue; the king’s dealers had them from Kue on commission, 29 and a chariot used to come up out of Egypt for six hundred shekels of silver and a pony for a hundred and fifty; and they were similarly imported through them for all the kings of the Hittites and for the kings of Syria.
11:1-43
11 And King Solomon loved women, and had seven hundred queens and three hundred concubines; and he took many foreign wives, Moabite, ʽAmmonite, Edomite, Phenician, Hittite, 2 out of the nations of which Jehovah said to the sons of Israel “You shall not go among them nor have them come among you, lest they bend your hearts to follow their gods”
Solomon consorted with those in love.
3
4 And at the time of Solomon’s old age his wives bent his heart to follow other gods, and his heart was not at one with his God Jehovah like his father David’s heart; 5 and Solomon went after ʽAshtart the goddess of the Phenicians and Milcom the god of the ʽAmmonites, 6 and Solomon did what displeased Jehovah, and did not altogether follow Jehovah like his father David.
7 Then Solomon built a height for Kemosh the god of Moab on the mountain in front of Jerusalem, and for Milcom the god of the Bene-ʽAmmon; 8 and so for all his foreign wives he made burning-places and altars for their gods.
9 And Jehovah was angered with Solomon because he had bent his heart away from Israel’s God Jehovah, who had appeared to him twice 10 and had given him orders about this matter, not to follow other gods, and he had not obeyed the orders Jehovah had given him.
11 And Jehovah said to Solomon “Since you have been thus minded, and have not kept my covenant and usages which I commanded you, I will tear the kingship off you and give it to your slave.
12 I will not do it in your time though, for the sake of your father David.
I will take it out of your son’s hands; 13 only I will not tear away all the kingship, I will give your son one tribe, for the sake of my servant David and for the sake of Jerusalem which I have chosen.”
14
And Hadad the Edomite: he was of the royal blood in Edom, 15 and when David made havoc of the Edomites, when General Joab went up to bury the slain and killed every male in Edom 16 (for Joab and all Israel stayed there six months, till they had made away with every male in Edom) 17 Hadad fled away, he and certain Edomites with him, officers of his father’s, to go to Egypt, Hadad being a small boy; 18 and they left Midian and came to Paran, and took men with them out of Paran, and came into Egypt, to the Pharaoh, the king of Egypt; and he gave him a house and appointed him an allowance of bread, and gave him land.
19 And the Pharaoh showed Hadad very much favor, and he gave him a wife, his own wife’s sister, the sister of Queen Tahminas, 20 and Tahminas’s sister became the mother of his son Genubath, whom Tahminas brought up in the Pharaoh’s family; and Genubath was in the Pharaoh’s palace among the Egyptian princes.
21 And Hadad heard in Egypt that David had gone to rest with his fathers and that General Joab was dead; and Hadad said to the Pharaoh “Give me leave to go to my own country.” 22 And the Pharaoh said to him “Why, what are you stinted for with me? and here you are wanting to go to your own country.”
But he said “No, do give me leave”; and Hadad went back to his own country. . . .
23 And Jehovah raised up an antagonist to Solomon, Rezon the son of Eljadaʽ, who had fled away from his sovereign King Hadadʽezer of Soba, 24 and men had gathered around him and he had become the captain of a band of raiders, when David was killing them; and he took Damascus and lived in it and became king at Damascus, 25 and was an adversary to Israel throughout Solomon’s time.
This is the mischief Hadad did; and he bore Israel a grudge, and became king over Edom.
26
And Jeroboam the son of Nebat, an Ephraimite from Sereda, a widow’s son, an officer of Solomon’s who raised his hand against the king.
27 And this was the occasion on which he raised his hand against the king: Solomon built the Millo, closed up the breach in the fortifications of his father David’s city; 28 and this Jeroboam was an energetic man, and Solomon saw that the young fellow was efficient and appointed him over all the porterage of the line of Joseph.
29 And at that time Jeroboam had gone out of Jerusalem, and the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite found him on the road, he having a new cloak about him and the two being alone out in the country; 30 and Ahijah seized the new cloak he had on and tore it in twelve pieces, 31 and said to Jeroboam “Take ten pieces for yourself; for Jehovah the God of Israel says ‘I am tearing the kingship out of Solomon’s hands and giving you ten tribes 32 (but he shall have one tribe for the sake of my servant David and for the sake of Jerusalem, the city that I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel), 33 since he has left me and done reverence to ʽAshtart the goddess of the Phenicians and to Kemosh the god of the Moabites and to Milcom the god of the Bene-ʽAmmon, and not walked in my ways, doing what I approve and living up to my usages and laws like his father David.
34 But I will not take all the kingship out of his hands, but install him as prince all his lifetime for the sake of my servant David whom I chose, who kept my commandments and usages; 35 but I will take the kingship out of his son’s hands and give it to you, the ten tribes, 36 and to his son I will give one tribe in order that through all time my servant David may have a lamp before me in Jerusalem, the city I have chosen for myself, to put my name there.
37 And you I will take and you shall reign with absolute power and be king over Israel.
38 And if you listen to all that I command you, and walk in my ways and do what I approve, keeping my usages and commandments as my servant David did, I will be with you and build you a secure house, as I did for David.’” 39
40 And Solomon meant to put Jeroboam to death; but Jeroboam got away to Egypt, to Shoshak the king of Egypt, and was in Egypt till Solomon’s death.
41 And as to the rest of Solomon’s history, and all that he did, and his wisdom, it is recorded in the History of Solomon.
42 And the time that Solomon was king at Jerusalem over all Israel was forty years.
43 And Solomon went to rest with his fathers, and was buried in his father David’s city; and his son Rehoboam succeeded him.
12:1-33
12 And Rehoboam came to Shekem, because all Israel had come to Shekem to install him as king; 2
3 and they told Rehoboam 4 “Your father made our yoke bear hard on us; now make the hard service to your father rather easier, and his heavy yoke that he put on us, and we will be your subjects.” 5 And he said to them “Go, and in three days more come back to me”; and they went.
6 And King Rehoboam consulted the old men who had been in the service of his father Solomon when he was alive, asking them “How do you advise me to reply to these people?” 7 and they told him “If today you will be a subject to these people and respond to them and speak them fair, they will be subjects to you permanently.” 8 But he discarded the old men’s policy which they had recommended to him, and consulted the boys who had grown up with him, whom he had in his service, 9 and said to them “What reply do you advise that we give to these people who have told me ‘Make the yoke your father put on us rather easier’?” 10 And the boys who had grown up with him told him “This is what you will say to these people who have told you ‘Your father made our yoke heavy, be easier on us’: you will tell them ‘My little finger is thicker than my father’s hips.
11 Now my father imposed a heavy yoke on you, and I will add to your yoke; my father punished you with whips, and I will punish you with scorpions.’”
12 And all Israel came to Rehoboam on the third day as the king had told them, “Come back to me on the third day”; 13 and the king gave them a harsh answer, and discarded the old men’s policy which they had recommended to him 14 and spoke to them in accordance with the boys’ policy, “My father made your yoke heavy, and I will add to your yoke; my father punished you with whips, and I will punish you with scorpions.” 15 And the king did not listen to the people, because it was a crisis determined by Jehovah in order to make good his prediction which Jehovah had given by Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat.
16 And all Israel saw that the king had not listened to them; and the people replied to the king “What share have we in David? no estate in Jesse’s son; to your homes, Israel! now look after your own house, David!” 17 and Israel went to their homes.
18 And King Rehoboam sent Adoniram, the superintendent of the corvée; and all Israel stoned him to death.
And King Rehoboam put his best foot foremost in getting into his chariot to take flight to Jerusalem; 19 and Israel rebelled against the house of David, and it has lasted to this day.
20 And when all Israel heard that Jeroboam had come back they sent and called him to the congress, and made him king over all Israel: nobody followed the house of David but the tribe of Judah alone.
21 And Rehoboam came to Jerusalem and assembled all the house of Judah and the tribe of Benjamin, a hundred and eighty thousand picked warriors, to make war with the house of Israel, to restore the kingship to Rehoboam the son of Solomon.
22 And Jehovah’s word came to Shemaʽiah the man of God 23 “Say to Rehoboam the son of Solomon, the king of Judah, and to all the houses of Judah and Benjamin and the rest of the people, 24 ‘Says Jehovah, You shall not go up, nor make war with your brothers the sons of Israel; go back home; for this thing has come from me.’”
And they listened to Jehovah’s word and went back, going by Jehovah’s word.
25 And Jeroboam fortified Shekem in the highland of Ephraim, and made it his capital; and he went out from there and fortified Penuel.
26 And Jeroboam said to himself “Now the kingship will go back to the family of David: 27 if these people go up to offer sacrifice at Jehovah’s house at Jerusalem, the people’s hearts will turn back to their sovereign King Rehoboam of Judah, and they will kill me.” 28 And the king thought up a policy, and made two golden calves and said to the people “No more going up to Jerusalem: here are your gods, Israel, that brought you up out of Egypt”; 29 and he set one in Bethel and one he put in Dan, 30 and this thing became a sin.
And the people went before the one up to Dan, 31 and he made height-houses, and made priests out of the common people who were not sons of Levi; 32 and Jeroboam appointed a feast in the eighth month, on the fifteenth day of the month, like the feast in Judah, and went up the altar.
So he did at Bethel, sacrificing to the calves he had made and setting up at Bethel the height-priests he had made.
33 And he went up the altar he had made at Bethel on the fifteenth day of the eighth month, the month he had improvised out of his own fancy; and he appointed a feast for the sons of Israel, and went up the altar to offer.
13:1-34
13 And a man of God came out of Judah, by Jehovah’s commission, to Bethel, while Jeroboam was standing by the altar to offer; 2 and he proclaimed against the altar by Jehovah’s commission “Altar, altar, Jehovah says, a child is being born to the house of David, named Josiah; and he shall kill as sacrifices on you the height-priests that offer on you, and they shall burn human bones on you.” 3 And he gave a token that day, “This is the token that Jehovah spoke: the altar is to burst and the fat-ashes on it to run out.” 4 And when the king heard the words that the man of God proclaimed against the altar at Bethel, Jeroboam put out his hand from the altar, saying “Arrest him”; and his arm that he put out against him hardened, and he could not draw it back to himself; 5 and the altar burst and the fat-ashes ran out from the altar in accordance with the token that the man of God had given by Jehovah’s commission.
6 And the king answered by saying to the man of God “Propitiate your God Jehovah so that my hand will come back”; and the man of God propitiated Jehovah, and the king’s hand came back and was as it had been at first.
7 And the king told the man of God “Come into the palace with me and have something to brace you up and let me give you a present”; 8 but the man of God said to the king “If you would give me half your palace I would not go in with you, and I will not eat food nor drink water in this place; 9 for so I was commanded by Jehovah’s commission, ‘You shall not eat food nor drink water, nor go back the way you came.’” 10 And he went away by another road, and did not go back by the road by which he had come to Bethel.
11 And a certain old prophet was living at Bethel, and his sons came in and told him all about the deed the man of God had done that day at Bethel, and the words he had spoken to the king: they told their father, 12 and their father said to them “Which way did he go?” and his sons showed him the road that the man of God who came out of Judah had gone.
13 And he said to his sons “Saddle the donkey for me”; and they saddled the donkey for him, and he mounted it, 14 and went after the man of God and found him sitting under the terebinth-tree, and said to him “Are you the man of God who came out of Judah?” and he said “Yes.” 15 And he said to him “Come home with me and eat a meal”; 16 but he said “I cannot go back with you and go in with you, and I will not eat food nor drink water in this place; 17 for I was told by Jehovah’s commission ‘You shall not eat food nor drink water, nor go over again the way you went on.’” 18 But he said to him “I am a prophet the same as you are, and an angel told me by Jehovah’s commission ‘Bring him back home with you to eat a meal and drink water.’”
He lied to him; 19 but he went back with him and ate a meal in his house and drank water, 20 and they were sitting at the table when Jehovah’s word came to the prophet who had brought him back, 21 and he called out to the man of God who had come out of Judah “Says Jehovah, Since you have disobeyed Jehovah, and not kept the commandment that your God Jehovah gave you, 22 and have gone back and eaten food and drunk water in the place of which he spoke to you the words ‘Do not eat food nor drink water,’ your body shall not come to the grave of your fathers.” 23 And after he had eaten a meal and had drunk, he saddled the donkey for himself and went again; 24 and a lion found him on the road and killed him, and his body lay thrown down in the road with the donkey standing by it and the lion standing by the body.
25 And there were men passing by who saw the body thrown down in the road and the lion standing by the body, and they went in and spoke of it in the city the old prophet lived in.
26 And the prophet who had brought him back from his journey heard of it and said “It is the man of God who disobeyed Jehovah; Jehovah has given him to the lion, which has struck him down and killed him in accordance with Jehovah’s word that he had spoken to him.” 27 And he said to his sons “Saddle the donkey for me”; and they did so.
28 And he went and found his body thrown down in the road, and the donkey and the lion standing by the body; the lion had not eaten the body nor struck down the donkey; 29 and the prophet lifted the body of the man of God and laid it on his donkey and brought it back to the city to bewail and bury it.
30 And he laid the body in his own tomb, and they bewailed him with “Alas, brother!” 31 And after he had buried him he said to his sons “When I die bury me in the tomb the man of God is buried in; lay me beside his bones, so that my bones may escape with his; for the thing is to be, 32 the thing that he proclaimed by Jehovah’s commission against the altar at Bethel and against all the height-houses in the cities of Samaria.”
33 After this affair Jeroboam did not turn back from his evil course, but made height-priests again out of the common people: whoever pleased, Jeroboam would install him, and they became height-priests.
34 And this thing became the sin of Jeroboam’s family, and effacement and extirpation off the face of the earth.
14 At that time Jeroboam’s son Abijah fell sick; 2 and Jeroboam said to his wife “Up with you, and change your clothes so that they will not know you are Jeroboam’s wife, and go to Shiloh: there you will find the prophet Ahijah; it was he predicted my being king over this people.
3 And take in your hand ten cakes of bread, and seed-cakes and a bottle of honey, and go in where he is: he will tell you what is to happen to the boy.” 4 And Jeroboam’s wife did so, and rose and went to Shiloh and into Ahijah’s house.
And Ahijah could not see, because his eyes were set as a result of his old age; 5 but Jehovah had said to Ahijah “Here is Jeroboam’s wife come to make an inquiry of you as to her son, because he is sick: thus and so you shall speak to her.”
And when she came in she was in disguise; 6 but when Ahijah heard the sound of her feet as she came in at the door he said “Come in, wife of Jeroboam; what are you in disguise for, when I am sent to you with a hard message? 7 Go say to Jeroboam ‘Says Jehovah the God of Israel, Whereas I elevated you from among the people and set you as warden over my people Israel, 8 and tore the kingship away from the family of David and gave it to you, and you have not been like my servant David in his keeping all my commandments and following me with all his heart, doing only what I approved, 9 but have done worse than all that there had been before you, and have gone and made yourself other gods and statues, to provoke me, and thrown me behind your back, 10 therefore I am bringing mischief to Jeroboam’s family, and will exterminate every male person that belongs to Jeroboam, barred and unbarred in Israel, and rout out Jeroboam’s family as one routs dung, till it is all out.
11 Whoever of Jeroboam’s dies in the city the dogs shall eat, and whoever dies in the country the birds of the air shall eat; for Jehovah has spoken.’ 12 And as for you, rise and go home: when your feet enter the city the child shall die; 13 and all Israel shall bewail him and bury him
for he alone out of Jeroboam’s family shall go into a grave, since he in Jeroboam’s family has something good found in him with reference to Jehovah the God of Israel.
14 And Jehovah will raise up for himself a king over Israel who shall exterminate Jeroboam’s family: this is the day, and what even now? 15 And Jehovah will strike Israel as reeds sway in the water, and will uproot Israel from the good soil he gave to their fathers and scatter them on the other side of the River, since they have been making their asherahs, provoking Jehovah; 16 and he will give Israel away on account of Jeroboam’s sins which he committed and caused Israel to commit.”
17 And Jeroboam’s wife rose and went, and came to Tirsah; as she came on the threshold of the house the boy died.
18 And they buried him, and all Israel bewailed him, in accordance with Jehovah’s prediction that he had made by his servant the prophet Ahijah.
19 And as to the rest of the history of Jeroboam, his fighting and his becoming king, it is recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
20 And the time that Jeroboam was king was twenty-two years; and he went to rest with his fathers, and his son Nadab succeeded him.
21 And Rehoboam the son of Solomon became king in Judah; Rehoboam was forty-one years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned seventeen years at Jerusalem, the city Jehovah had chosen, to put his name there, out of all the tribes of Israel; and his mother’s name was Naʽamah the ʽAmmonite.
22 And Judah did what displeased Jehovah, and stirred his jealousy beyond all that their fathers did by their sins which they committed; 23 and they too built themselves heights and obelisks and asherahs on every high hill and under every verdant tree.
24 And there was also religious prostitution in the country; they did just like the detestable ways of the nations Jehovah had dispossessed before the sons of Israel.
25 And in the year five of King Rehoboam, King Shoshak of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, 26 and took the treasures of Jehovah’s house and of the palace, took everything; and he took all the golden shields Solomon had made.
27 And King Rehoboam made bronze shields instead, and committed them to the charge of the captains of the runners who guarded the door of the palace; 28 and as often as the king came to Jehovah’s house the runners carried them, and took them back to the guard-chamber.
29 And as to the rest of the history of Rehoboam, and all that he did, it is recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Judah.
30 And there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all the time.
31 And Rehoboam went to rest with his fathers, and was buried in David’s City, and his son Abijam succeeded him.
15:1-34
15 And in the year eighteen of King Jeroboam the son of Nebat, Abijam became king over Judah; 2 he reigned three years at Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Maʽacah the daughter of Abishalom.
3 And he walked in his father’s sins that he had done before him, and his heart was not at one with his God Jehovah like his father David’s heart
4 for it was on David’s account that his God Jehovah had given him a lamp at Jerusalem, setting up his sons after him and keeping up Jerusalem, 5 David having done what Jehovah approved and not turned from anything that he commanded him all his life.
6
7 and as to the rest of the history of Abijam, and all that he did, it is recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Judah.
And there was war between Abijam and Jeroboam.
8 And Abijam went to rest with his fathers, and they buried him in David’s City; and his son Asa succeeded him.
9 And in the year twenty of King Jeroboam of Israel, Asa of Judah became king; 10 and he reigned forty-one years at Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Maʽacah the daughter of Abishalom.
11 And Asa did what Jehovah approved, like his father David; 12 and he dispatched the religious sodomites out of the country, and removed all the fetishes his fathers had made, 13 and his mother Maʽacah too he deposed from her queenship because she had made a horror of an asherah; and Asa cut down her horror and burned it in Kidron Arroyo.
14 But the heights were not removed; Asa’s heart, however, was at one with Jehovah all his life.
15 And he brought in his father’s consecrated articles and his own to Jehovah’s house, silver and gold and furnishings.
16 And there was war between Asa and King Baʽasha of Israel all their reigns; 17 and King Baʽasha of Israel came up against Judah and fortified Ramah, blockading King Asa of Judah.
18 And Asa took all the silver and gold that was left in the treasuries of Jehovah’s house and the palace treasuries and committed them to his officers, and King Asa sent them to Ben-Hadad the son of Tabrimmon the son of Hezjon, the king of Syria, who lived at Damascus, with the message 19 “There is a treaty between you and me, between your father and mine; here I have sent you a present of silver and gold: go break your treaty with King Baʽasha of Israel, so that he will withdraw from his attack on me.” 20 And Ben-Hadad listened to King Asa, and sent his generals against the cities of Israel, and ravaged ʽIjon and Dan and Abel Beth-Maʽacah and all Gennesaret, along with all the country of Naphtali; 21 and when Baʽasha heard of it he left off fortifying Ramah and went back to Tirsah, 22 and King Asa summoned all Judah, nobody being exempt, and they carried away the stone and timber of Ramah, that Baʽasha had built in, and with it King Asa fortified Gebaʽ in Benjamin and Mispah.
23 And as to all the rest of the history of Asa, and all his exploits and everything he did, and the cities he fortified, they are recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Judah.
During his old age, however, he was diseased in his feet.
24 And Asa went to rest with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in his father David’s city; and his son Jehoshaphat succeeded him.
25 And Nadab the son of Jeroboam became king over Israel in the year two of King Asa of Judah, and reigned over Israel two years; 26 and he did what displeased Jehovah, and followed in his father’s path and his sin which he made Israel sin.
27 And Baʽasha the son of Ahijah, of the family of Issacar, organized a revolution against him; 28 and Baʽasha assassinated him at Gibbethon, which belongs to the Philistines, as Nadab and all Israel were besieging Gibbethon, in the year three of King Asa of Judah, and succeeded him.
29 And when he came to the throne he killed all Jeroboam’s family, not leaving a living soul of Jeroboam’s in accordance with Jehovah’s prediction which he had made by his servant Ahijah the Shilonite, 30 for Jeroboam’s sins that he committed and caused Israel to commit in the provocation he gave to Israel’s God Jehovah.
31 And as to the rest of the history of Nadab, and all that he did, it is recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
32
33 In the year three of King Asa of Judah, Baʽasha the son of Ahijah became king over Israel for a reign of twenty-four years at Tirsah; 34 and he did what displeased Jehovah, and followed Jeroboam’s path and his sin that he caused Israel to commit.
16:1-34
16 And Jehovah’s word came to Jehu the son of Hanani against Baʽasha, 2 “Since I raised you from the dust and set you as warden over my people Israel, and you have followed Jeroboam’s path and caused my people Israel to sin, provoking me by their sins, 3 I am routing out Baʽasha and his family and making your family like the family of Jeroboam the son of Nebat: 4 whoever of Baʽasha’s dies in the city the dogs shall eat, and whoever of his dies in the country the birds of the air shall eat.”
5 And as to the rest of the history of Baʽasha, and what he did, and his exploits, they are recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
6 And Baʽasha went to rest with his fathers, and was buried at Tirsah; and his son Elah succeeded him.
7 Moreover, Jehovah’s word came to Baʽasha and his family by Jehu the son of Hanani both for all that he did that displeased Jehovah, provoking him with his handiwork, becoming like the family of Jeroboam, and for his killing it off.
8 In the year twenty-six of King Asa of Judah, Elah the son of Baʽasha became king over Israel for a reign of two years at Tirsah.
9 And his officer Zimri, the captain of half the chariotry, organized a revolution against him, and as he was at Tirsah getting drunk at the house of Arsa the steward of the palace at Tirsah, 10 Zimri came in and assassinated him in the year twenty-seven of King Asa of Judah, and succeeded him.
11 And when he became king, as soon as he was seated on the throne he killed off all Baʽasha’s family, not leaving him any male person, and his kinsmen and friends: 12 Zimri rooted out all Baʽasha’s family, in accordance with Jehovah’s prediction which he made to Baʽasha by the prophet Jehu, 13 for all Baʽasha’s sins and the sins of his son Elah, which they had committed and had caused Israel to commit, provoking Israel’s God Jehovah with their superstitions.
14 And as to the rest of the history of Elah, and all that he did, it is recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
15 In the year twenty-seven of King Asa of Judah, Zimri became king for a reign of seven days at Tirsah.
But the people were in camp attacking Gibbethon, which belongs to the Philistines; 16 and the people in the camp heard the word “Zimri has organized a revolution, and he has killed the king,” and all Israel made ʽOmri, a general, king of Israel that day at the camp.
17 And ʽOmri, and all Israel with him, went up from Gibbethon and besieged Tirsah; 18 and when Zimri saw that the city was taken he went into the keep of the palace and burned the palace down over his head, and so died, 19 for his sins that he had committed in doing what displeased Jehovah, following Jeroboam’s path, and his sin that he had committed, causing Israel to sin.
20 And as to the rest of the history of Zimri, and his revolution that he organized, it is recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
21 Then the people, Israel, divided into parties: half the people backed Tibni the son of Ginath to make him king, and half backed ʽOmri.
22 And the party backing ʽOmri was too strong for the party backing Tibni; and Tibni and his brother Joram died at that time, and ʽOmri became king at Tirsah.
23 In the year thirty-one of King Asa of Judah, ʽOmri became king over Israel for a reign of twelve years: he reigned at Tirsah six years, 24 and he bought the plateau of Samaria from Shemer for two hundred-weight of silver, and fortified the plateau, and named the city that he built after Shemer, the owner of the plateau, “Shamaria” or Samaria.
25 And ʽOmri did what displeased Jehovah, and did worse than all who had gone before him; 26 and he walked altogether in the path of Jeroboam the son of Nebat and in his sins that he caused Israel to commit, provoking Israel’s God Jehovah with their superstitions.
27 And as to the rest of the history of ʽOmri, and all that he did, and his exploits, they are recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
28 And ʽOmri went to rest with his fathers, and was buried at Samaria, and his son Ahab succeeded him.
29 And Ahab the son of ʽOmri became king over Israel in the year thirty-eight of King Asa of Judah; and Ahab the son of ʽOmri reigned over Israel at Samaria for twenty-two years.
30 And Ahab the son of ʽOmri did more to displease Jehovah than all who had gone before him: 31 his walking in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat was the slightest part; he married Jezebel, the daughter of King Ethbaal of the Phenicians, and went and worshiped the Baal and did reverence to him, 32 and erected an altar to the Baal in the Baal’s house that he built in Samaria.
33 And Ahab made the asherah; and Ahab kept on doing things to provoke Israel’s God Jehovah more than all the kings of Israel that had gone before him.
34 In his days Ahiel the Bethelite fortified Jericho; he laid its foundation with his oldest son Abiram, and set up its gates with his youngest son Segub, in accordance with Jehovah’s prediction which he had made by Joshuaʽ the son of Nun.
17:1-24
17 And Elijah the Tishbite (from Tishbe in Gilead) said to Ahab “By Israel’s God Jehovah, in whose service I am, there shall not be dew nor rain these years except at my word.” 2 And Jehovah’s word came to him 3 “Go from here and turn eastward, and conceal yourself in Kerith Arroyo, which fronts the Jordan: 4 you shall drink from the arroyo, and I have ordered the ravens to furnish you food there.” 5 And Elijah did as Jehovah said, and went and lived in Kerith Arroyo, which fronts the Jordan; 6 and the ravens brought him bread in the morning and meat in the evening, and he drank from the arroyo.
7 But after some time the arroyo dried up, because there was no rain in the country.
8 And Jehovah’s word came to him 9 “Go away to Sarephath, which belongs to Sidon: I have ordered a widow there to furnish you food.” 10 And he went away to Sarephath, and came to the entrance of the city and found there a widow gathering wood; and he called to her “Get me a little water in the dipper to drink,” 11 and she went to get it; and he called after her “Get me a bit of bread and bring it in your hand,” 12 but she said “By your God Jehovah, I haven’t a biscuit, but a handful of meal in the jar and a little oil in the jug; and here I am gathering a couple of sticks, and am going in to cook it for me and my children, and we are going to eat it and die.” 13 And Elijah said to her “Do not be afraid: go in and do as you say, only make me a little biscuit out of it first and bring it out to me, and cook for yourself and your children afterward; 14 for, says Israel’s God Jehovah, the jar of meal will not give out, nor the jug of oil run short, till the day that Jehovah sends showers over the soil.”
15 And she went and did as Elijah said, and had enough to eat, she and he and her family, for some time: 16 the jar of meal did not give out nor the jug of oil run short, in accordance with Jehovah’s promise which he had given by Elijah.
17 But after these events the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick, and it went hard with him, till he ceased to breathe.
18 And she said to Elijah “What business had you with me, man of God? you came to me to draw God’s attention to my offenses, and to kill my son!” 19 And he said to her “Give me your son,” and took him out of her arms and carried him up to the roof-chamber he was living in, and laid him on his bed, 20 and called out to Jehovah “My God Jehovah, have you even been harming the widow I am staying with, by causing the death of her son?” 21 And he stretched himself full length on the child three times, and called out to Jehovah “My God Jehovah, let this child’s soul come back into him”; 22 and Jehovah obeyed Elijah, and the child’s soul came back into him and he revived.
23 And Elijah took the child and carried him down from the roof-chamber to the house and gave him to his mother, and said “See, your son is alive.” 24 And the woman said to Elijah “Now I know you are a man of God, and Jehovah’s word in’ your mouth is truth.”
18:1-46
18 And after a long time Jehovah’s word came to Elijah, in the third year, “Go and appear before Ahab, so that I may send rain over the soil”; 2 and Elijah went to appear before Ahab.
And the famine was pressing hard in Samaria; 3 and Ahab called ʽObadiah the steward of the palace (ʽObadiah was a great fearer of Jehovah: 4 when Jezebel exterminated Jehovah’s prophets, ʽObadiah took a hundred prophets and hid them fifty in a cave, and furnished them bread and water), 5 and Ahab said to ʽObadiah “Come, let us go through the country to all the springs and arroyos; perhaps we may find grass and save the life of pony and mule, and not be deprived of the race of cattle.” 6 And they divided the country between them to go over: Ahab went one way and ʽObadiah went by himself another way.
7 And as ʽObadiah was on his way he found Elijah coming to meet him; and he recognized him and threw himself down on his face and said “Is this your reverence, Elijah?” 8 and he said to him “Yes; go tell your master ‘here is Elijah.’” 9 And he said “What wrong have I done, that you are giving your servant into Ahab’s hands to be put to death? 10 By your God Jehovah, there is no nation or kingdom where my master has not sent to look for you; and they would say ‘not here,’ and he would take an oath of the kingdom or nation that they did not find you.
11 And now you say ‘Go tell your master “here is Elijah”’; 12 and while I go from you Jehovah’s spirit will lift you away I do not know where, and I shall come to tell Ahab and he will not find you and will kill me; but your servant has been a fearer of Jehovah from boyhood.
13 Has your reverence not been told what I did when Jezebel was killing Jehovah’s prophets, and I hid a hundred of Jehovah’s prophets, fifty in a cave, and furnished them bread and water? 14 and now you say ‘Go tell your master “here is Elijah,”’ and he will kill me.” 15 And Elijah said “By Jehovah of Armies, in whose service I am, today I will show myself to him.”
16 And ʽObadiah went to meet Ahab, and told him; and Ahab went to meet Elijah.
17 And when Ahab saw Elijah, Ahab said to him “Is that you, you trouble-breeder of Israel?” 18 and he said “I have not bred trouble for Israel; it is you and your family that have, in leaving Jehovah and going after the Baals.
19 But now send and gather to meet me at Mount Carmel all Israel, and the four hundred and fifty prophets of the Baal and the four hundred prophets of the asherah who eat from Jezebel’s table.
20 And Ahab sent all through Israel and gathered all the prophets at Mount Carmel.
21 And Elijah came up to all the people and said “Till when will you limp along on both conceptions? if Jehovah is God follow him, and if the Baal, follow him”; and the people gave him not a word of answer.
22 And Elijah said to the people “I am the only prophet of Jehovah left, and of the Baal’s prophets there are four hundred and fifty men.
23 Then let them give us two steers, and let them choose themselves one steer and cut it up and lay it on the wood, and not put in any fire, and I will prepare one steer and not put in any fire; 24 and you shall call on the name of your god, and I will call on the name of Jehovah, and the god that answers with fire is God.”
And all the people answered “All right.”
25 And Elijah said to the prophets of the Baal “Choose yourselves one steer and prepare it first, because there are more of you, and call on the name of your god, but do not put in any fire.” 26 And they took the steer and prepared it, and called on the name of the Baal from morning till noon, “Baal, answer us!” without getting a sound of answer, and hobbled along by the altar they had made.
27 And at noon Elijah derided them and said “Call loud, because he is a god
because he is occupied with his private concerns
because he is gone on an expedition
maybe he is asleep and will wake up”; 28 and they called loudly and hacked themselves with swords and lances in their fashion till blood flowed over them.
29 And through the afternoon they were under the power till time for making the offering, without getting a sound of answer or attention.
30 And Elijah said to all the people “Come here to me”; and all the people came to him; and he mended the broken-down altar of Jehovah.
31 And Elijah took twelve stones, equal in number to the tribes of the sons of Jacob to whom came Jehovah’s word “Your name shall be Israel,” 32 and built the stones into an altar in Jehovah’s name, and made a trench, taking in room for about three pecks of seed, around the altar, 33 and laid the wood and cut up the steer and laid it on the wood, and said “Fill four jars with water and pour it over the burnt-offering and the wood”; and they did so.
34 And he said “Do it again”; and they did it again.
And he said “Do it the third time”; and they did it the third time, 35 and the water ran around the altar, and he filled the trench with water too.
36 And at offering-making the prophet Elijah approached it and said “Jehovah, God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, today let it be recognized that you are God in Israel and I am your servant, and it was at your word I did all these things.
37 Answer me, Jehovah, answer me, and let this people know that you, Jehovah, are God, and it was you who turned their hearts backward.” 38 And Jehovah’s fire fell and consumed the burnt-offering and the wood and the stones and the soil, and licked up the water in the trench; 39 and all the people saw and threw themselves down on their faces and said “Jehovah is God, Jehovah is God.” 40 And Elijah said to them “Get hold of the prophets of the Baal; do not let a single man escape”; and they seized them, and Elijah took them down to Kishon Arroyo and cut their throats there.
41 And Elijah said to Ahab “Go up, eat and drink, because there is a roaring of rain in the air”; 42 and Ahab went up to eat and drink.
And Elijah went up on the top of Carmel and crouched on the ground and put his face between his knees, 43 and said to his man “Go up and look toward the west”; and he went up and looked, and said “There isn’t anything,” and he said “Go again,” seven times.
44 And at the seventh time he said “Here is a little cloud like a man’s hand coming up in the west”; and he said “Go up and tell Ahab ʽHarness and go down, so the rain will not keep you back.’” 45 And before long the sky grew dark with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain; and Ahab rode to Jezreʽel, 46 but Jehovah’s hand was on Elijah and he girded his waist and ran before Ahab clear to Jezreʽel.
19 And Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done, and all about his putting all the prophets to the sword; 2 and Jezebel sent Elijah the message “If you are Elijah and I am Jezebel, the gods do so and more but right off tomorrow I will make your life like the life of one of them.” 3 And he was afraid, and went off for his life; and he came to Beer-Shebaʽ, which belongs to Judah, and left his man there, while he went into the wilderness a day’s journey.
4 And he came and sat down under a broom-bush and begged to die, and said “It is too much: now, Jehovah, take my life, for I am not better than my fathers.” 5 And he lay down and went to sleep under a broom-bush, and found someone touching him and saying “Get up and eat.” 6 And he looked, and there at his head were an ash-cake and a jug of water; and he ate and drank and lay down.
7 And the Angel of Jehovah touched him again for the second time, and said “Get up and eat, because the journey is too long for you”; 8 and he got up and ate and drank, and went, by the strength from that meal, forty days and forty nights, to Mount Horeb, and went into the cave there and spent the night there.
9 And he found Jehovah’s word coming to him, “What are you here for, Elijah?” 10 And he said “I am jealous on behalf of Jehovah the God of Armies because the sons of Israel have left you: they have demolished your altars and put your prophets to the sword; I am the only one left, and they are hunting for my life and meaning to get it.”
11 And he said “Go out and stand on the mountainside before Jehovah”; and he found Jehovah passing by, and a great hard wind tearing up mountains and breaking cliffs in pieces before Jehovah, Jehovah not in the wind, and after the wind an earthquake, Jehovah not in the earthquake, 12 and after the earthquake a fire, Jehovah not in the fire, and after the fire a sound of soft whispering.
13 And when Elijah heard it he wrapped his face in his mantle and went out and stood at the mouth of the cave, and found a voice addressing him, “What are you here for, Elijah?” 14 and he said “I am jealous on behalf of Jehovah the God of Armies because the sons of Israel have left you: they have demolished your altars and put your prophets to the sword; I am the only one left, and they are hunting for my life and meaning to get it.”
15 And Jehovah said to him “Go take the road again, to the wilderness of Damascus, and go in and anoint Hazael for king over Syria.
16 And Jehu the son of Nimshi you shall anoint for king over Israel, and Elishaʽ the son of Shaphat from Abel-Meholah you shall anoint for your own successor; 17 and him who escapes Hazael’s sword Jehu shall bring to his death, and him who escapes Jehu’s sword Elishaʽ shall bring to his death; 18 and I will leave in Israel seven thousand, all the knees that have never bent to the Baal and all the mouths that have never kissed him.”
19 And he went from there and found Elishaʽ the son of Shaphat, who was plowing with twelve yoke in front of him, himself with the twelfth; and Elijah went over to him and threw his mantle to him.
20 And he left the cattle and ran after Elijah and said “Let me kiss my father and mother and follow you”; and he said “Go on back: what have I done to you?” 21 And he went back from following him, and took the yoke of cattle and slaughtered them and boiled them with the woodwork of the team and gave the meat to the company, and they ate it; and he went off following Elijah and waiting on him.
20:1-43
20 And King Ben-Hadad of Syria gathered all his forces and came up and besieged Samaria, 2 and sent into the city to King Ahab of Israel and told him “Says Ben-Hadad, 3 Your silver and gold are mine, and the best of your wives and children are mine”; 4 and the king of Israel answered “As your majesty says, I and everything I have are yours.” 5 And the messengers came again and said “Says Ben-Hadad, I sent to tell you you should give me your silver and gold and wives and children; 6 but right off tomorrow I will send my officers to you and they shall search your house and the houses of your subjects, and help themselves to whatever you especially care for and take it.”
7 And the king of Israel summoned all the elders and said to them “Look and see for yourselves, the man is after mischief; for he had sent to me for my wives and children and my silver and gold, and I had not refused.” 8 And all the elders and all the people said to him “Do not consent nor obey.” 9 And he said to Ben-Hadad’s messengers “Tell his majesty ‘Everything that you sent to me about at first I will do, but this thing I cannot’”; and the messengers went and took the reply back to him.
10 And Ben-Hadad sent word to him “The gods do so to me, and more, if the dust in Samaria will suffice for handfuls for all the people at my back”; 11 and the king of Israel answered “That will do: a man fastening his belt should not brag like a man unfastening it.” 12 And when he heard these words as he was drinking, he and the kings, in the booths, he said to his officers “Invest”; and they invested the city.
13 And a prophet approached King Ahab of Israel and said “Says Jehovah, Have you seen all this great host?
I am giving it into your hands today, and you shall know that I am Jehovah.” 14 And Ahab said “By whom?” and he said “Says Jehovah, by the attendants of the lieutenants of the provinces.”
And he said “Who shall take the initiative?” and he said “You.” 15 And he mustered the attendants of the lieutenants of the provinces, and there were two hundred and thirty-two of them; and behind them he mustered all the people, all the sons of Israel, seven thousand of them.
16 And they went out at noon, while Ben-Hadad was getting drunk in the booths, he and the kings; 17 and the attendants of the lieutenants of the provinces went out first, and they sent and told him “Some men have come out of Samaria.” 18 And he said “If they have come out for peace, take them alive; and if they have come out for war, take them alive.” 19 And these came out of the city, the attendants of the lieutenants of the provinces and the forces that were behind them, 20 and each killed his man, and the Syrians took flight and the Israelites pursued them; and King Ben-Hadad of Syria made his escape on a pony, and some horsemen.
21 And the king of Israel went out and took the ponies and the chariots, and made great havoc among the Syrians.
22 And the prophet approached the king of Israel and said to him “Go make provisions, and have your mind made up what to do; for at the return of the year the king of Syria is coming up against you.”
23 And the officers of the king of Syria said to him “Their gods are mountain gods; that is why they were too strong for us; but let us fight them in the plain and see if we shall not be too strong for them.
24 And take this course: remove the kings from their places and appoint viceroys instead, 25 and yourself count off a force equal to the one that deserted you, with pony for pony and chariot for chariot, and let us fight them in the plain and see if we shall not be too strong for them”; and the king of Syria listened to them and did so.
26 And at the return of the year Ben-Hadad mustered the Syrians and came up to Aphek to fight Israel, 27 and the sons of Israel were mustered and provisioned and went to meet them; and the sons of Israel camped facing them, like two bunches of stray goats, while the Syrians filled the country.
28 And the man of God approached the king and said “Says Jehovah, Since the Syrians say ‘Jehovah is a god of the mountains and not of the vales,’ I will give all this great host into your hands, and you shall know that I am Jehovah.” 29 And they camped face to face for seven days; and on the seventh day battle was joined, and the sons of Israel defeated the Syrians, killing a hundred thousand infantry in one day; 30 and the survivors fled into the city of Aphek, and the wall fell on twenty-seven thousand survivors.
And Ben-Hadad fled and went into a closet.
31 And his officers said to him “See here, we have heard that the kings of the house of Israel are kindly kings: let us put sackcloths round our waists and ropes round our heads and go out to the king of Israel; he may spare your life.” 32 And they tied sackcloths round their waists and ropes round their heads and came to the king of Israel, and said “Your servant Ben-Hadad says ‘Spare my life.’”
And he said “Is he still alive? he is my brother.” 33 And the men, catching at the token, held him to him; word at once and said “Ben-Hadad is your brother!”
And he said “Go in and fetch him”; 34 and Ben-Hadad came out to him, and he took him up into the chariot.
And he said to him “The cities my father took from your father I will give back, and you shall establish bazars for yourself in Damascus as my father did in Samaria.”
“And on these terms I will let you go.”
And he made a treaty with him and let him go.
35 And a man who belonged to the prophets’ fellowship said to his friend, by Jehovah’s direction, “Knock me down”; but the man refused to do it, 36 and he said to him “Since you did not obey Jehovah, when you go from me a lion is going to bring you down”; and he went away from him, and a lion did find him and brought him down.
37 And he found another man and said to him “Knock me down”; and the man knocked him down, drawing blood on him.
38 And the prophet went and stood in the way of the king, and disguised himself with a bandage over his eyes; 39 and as the king passed by he cried out to the king and said “Your servant went out into the fight, and a man stepped out and brought a man to me and said ‘Guard this man; if he is missing it shall be your life for his, or you shall pay a hundred-weight of silver.’ 40 And then your servant was doing things in one place and another and he was gone.”
And the king of Israel said to him “That is your sentence; you have made the award yourself.” 41 And instantly he took the bandage off from over his eyes, and the king of Israel recognized him as being one of the prophets; 42 and he said to him “Says Jehovah, Since you have let out of your hands the man I claimed for death without quarter, it shall be your life and your people for his.” 43 And the king of Israel went on sullen and exasperated, and came to Samaria.
21:1-29
21 And it befell after these events that Naboth the Jezreʽelite had a vineyard beside the palace of King Ahab of Samaria, 2 and Ahab spoke to Naboth and said “Give me your vineyard so that I may have it for a vegetable garden, because it is close to my house; and I will give you a better vineyard instead; if you prefer, I will pay you the price of this one in money”; 3 and Naboth said to Ahab “Jehovah forbid the thought of my giving you my family estate.” 4 And Ahab came home sullen and exasperated over the words of Naboth the Jezreʽelite had spoken to him, “I will not give you my family estate,” and took to his bed and turned his face to the wall and ate no food.
5 And his wife Jezebel went into his room and said to him “What does it mean that your spirit has gone and you are eating no food?” 6 And he told her “Because I spoke to Naboth the Jezreʽelite and said ‘Give me your vineyard for money, or, if you like, I will give you a vineyard instead of it,’ and he said ‘I will not give you my vineyard.’” 7 And his wife Jezebel said to him “And it is you that are exercising the royal power over Israel now!
Get up, eat food and be gay; I will give you Naboth the Jezreʽelite’s vineyard.” 8 And she wrote letters in Ahab’s name and sealed them with his seal, and sent the letters to the elders and gentry that lived where Naboth did; 9 and in the letters she wrote “Proclaim a fast, and have Naboth sit at the head of the people, 10 and have two blackguards sit down in his presence and testify against him ‘You cursed God and the king’; and take him out and stone him to death.” 11 And the men of his city, the elders and gentry who were residents in his city, did as Jezebel had sent them word to, as was written in the letters she sent them: 12 proclaimed a fast, and had Naboth sit at the head of the people, 13 and in came the two blackguards and sat down in his presence and testified against him “Naboth cursed God and the king,” and they took him outside the city and stoned him to death; 14 and they sent Jezebel word “Naboth has been stoned to death.” 15 And when Jezebel heard that Naboth had been stoned to death Jezebel said to Ahab “Get up and take possession of Naboth the Jezreʽelite’s vineyard, which he refused to give you for money; for Naboth is not alive, he has died.” 16 And when Ahab heard that Naboth was dead, Ahab rose to go down to Naboth the Jezreʽelite’s vineyard to take possession of it.
17 And Jehovah’s word came to Elijah the Tishbite 18 “Go down to meet King Ahab of Israel, of Samaria; you will find him in Naboth’s vineyard, which he has gone down to take possession of; and tell him ‘Says Jehovah, You murdered and got possession, did you?’ 19 and tell him ‘Says Jehovah, In the place where the hogs and dogs lapped Naboth’s blood the dogs shall lap your own blood too.’” 20 And Ahab said to Elijah “Found me, have you, enemy?” and he said “Yes; since you have sold yourself to do mischief that displeases Jehovah, 21 I am bringing mischief to you, and will rout you out and will exterminate every male person that belongs to Ahab, barred and unbarred in Israel, 22 and make your family like the families of Jeroboam the son of Nebat and Baʽasha the son of Ahijah, for the affronts you gave me, and causing Israel to sin.
23 And Jehovah spoke of Jezebel too, and said ‘The dogs shall eat Jezebel on Jezreʽel common.’ 24 Whoever of Ahab’s dies in the city the dogs shall eat, and whoever dies in the country the birds of the air shall eat.” 25 No one at all was like Ahab, who sold himself to do what displeased Jehovah, his wife Jezebel instigating him; 26 and he went after fetishes most abominably, just as the Amorites had done, whom Jehovah dispossessed before the sons of Israel.
27 And when Ahab heard these words he tore his clothes and put a sackcloth on his flesh, and fasted, and slept in the sackcloth, and walked softly; 28 and Jehovah’s word came to Elijah the Tishbite 29 “Do you see how Ahab has humbled himself before me? since he has humbled himself before me, I will not bring the mischief in his days: in his son’s days I will bring the mischief upon his house.”
22:1-53
22 And they remained three years without war between Syria and Israel; 2 but in the third year King Jehoshaphat of Judah came down to the king of Israel, 3 and the king of Israel said to his officers “Do you know that Ramoth-Gilead belongs to us? and we are lying stir instead of taking it out of the king of Syria’s hands.” 4 And he said to Jehoshaphat “Will you go with me to Ramoth-Gilead to war?” and Jehoshaphat said “I will do the same as you do, my people the same as your people, my ponies the same as your ponies.”
5 And Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel “First inquire for Jehovah’s word”; 6 and the king of Israel gathered the prophets, about four hundred of them, and said to them “Shall I go against Ramoth-Gilead to war or shall I let it be?” and they said “Go up and Jehovah will give it into your majesty’s hands.”
7 And Jehoshaphat said “Is there not any other prophet of Jehovah here for us to inquire from?” 8 And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat “There is one other man to inquire of Jehovah from, but I hate him because he does not prophesy good luck for me but bad
Micajah the son of Imlah.”
And Jehoshaphat said “Do not say such things, your majesty.” 9 And the king of Israel called to a eunuch and said “Hurry up with Micajah the son of Imlah.” 10 And the king of Israel and King Jehoshaphat of Judah were sitting each on his throne, clad in robes of state, at the gate of Samaria, with all the prophets under the power before them.
11 And Sidkijah the son of Kenaʽanah made himself iron horns, and said “Says Jehovah, With these you shall gore the Syrians till you have finished them”; 12 and all the prophets prophesied so, “Go up to Ramoth-Gilead and be successful, Jehovah will give it into your majesty’s hands.” 13 And the messenger who went to summon Micajah told him “Here the prophets have unanimously spoken good luck for the king; let your word be like the word of one of them, speak good luck”; 14 but Micajah said “By Jehovah, what Jehovah tells me, that I will speak.”
15 And he came to the king, and the king said to him “Micajah, shall I go to Ramoth-Gilead to war or shall I let it be?” and he said to him “Go up and be successful, Jehovah will give it into your majesty’s hands.” 16 And the king said to him “How many times shall I adjure you not to speak anything at all but truth to me in Jehovah’s name?” 17 And he said “I saw all Israel scattered on the mountains like sheep without a shepherd, and Jehovah said ‘These have no sovereign; let them go home in peace.’”
18 And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat “Did I not tell you he would not prophesy good luck for me but bad?” 19 And he said “Hear Jehovah’s word, then!
I saw Jehovah sitting on his throne, and all the legions of heaven stood by at his right and left, 20 and Jehovah said ‘Who will inveigle Ahab into going up and falling at Ramoth-Gilead?’
And one said this way and another that way; 21 but the Spirit stood out before Jehovah and said ‘I will inveigle him,’ 22 and Jehovah said ‘In what ways? and it said ‘I will go out and be a spirit of falsehood in the mouths of all his prophets.’
And he said ‘You shall inveigle him and be successful in it; go out and do so.’ 23 Now here has Jehovah put a spirit of falsehood in the mouths of all these prophets of yours, but Jehovah proposes bad luck for you.” 24 And Sidkijah the son of Kenaʽanah came up and struck Micajah on the cheek and said “Where did Jehovah’s spirit pass from me to speak with you?” 25 and Micajah said “You are going to see on that day, you will be getting into a closet to hide.” 26 And the king of Israel said “Take Micajah and take him back to City Captain Amon and Prince Joash 27 and say ‘By order of the king, put this fellow in jail and feed him half rations of bread and water till I come safe here.’” 28 And Micajah said “If you do come back safe, Jehovah did not speak in me.”
29 And the king of Israel and King Jehoshaphat of Judah went up to Ramoth-Gilead; 30 and the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat “I disguise myself and go into the fighting; but do you wear your robes of state”; and the king of Israel disguised himself and went into the fighting.
31 And the king of Syria had given his chariot-captains, thirty-two of them, the order “Do not attack small or great but only the king of Israel”; 32 and when the chariot-captains saw Jehoshaphat, thinking it must be the king of Israel, they turned off against him to attack him; and Jehoshaphat called out, 33 and when the chariot-captains saw that it was not the king of Israel they turned back and left off following him.
34 And a man drew his bow at haphazard and hit the king of Israel between the tassets and the hauberk; and he said to his charioteer “Turn your ponies and take me out of the army, for I am hard hit”; 35 but the fight ran high that day, and the king was kept standing in the chariot facing the Syrians till evening, and the blood ran down into the bottom of the chariot; and at evening he died.
36 And a cry went through the army at sunset “Every man to his own city, and each to his own country; 37 for the king is dead!”
And they came to Samaria, and buried the king at Samaria.
38 And the chariot was washed at the reservoir of Samaria; and the dogs lapped up his blood, and the prostitutes bathed, in accordance with Jehovah’s prediction which he had made.
39 And as to the rest of the history of Ahab, and all that he did, and the ivory house that he built, and all the cities he fortified, they are recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
40 And Ahab went to rest with his fathers, and his son Ahaziah succeeded him.
41 And Jehoshaphat the son of Asa became king over Judah in the year four of King Ahab of Israel; 42 Jehoshaphat was thirty-five years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned twenty-five years at Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi.
43 And he walked altogether in the path of his father Asa, never turned from it, doing what Jehovah approved;
22:44
only the heights were not removed, the people still sacrificed and made burnings on the heights.
44 22:45 And Jehoshaphat made peace with the king of Israel.
45 22:46 And as to the rest of the history of Jehoshaphat, and the exploits he performed, they are recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Judah.
46 22:47 And Jehoshaphat routed out from the country the rest of the religious prostitutes that had been left in the days of his father Asa.
47 22:48 And there was no king in Edom; 48 22:49 and King Jehoshaphat’s commissioner made a Spain-ship to go to Ophir for gold, but did not go, because the ship was wrecked at Ghesjon-Geber.
49 22:50 Then Ahaziah the son of Ahab said to Jehoshaphat “Let my officers go with yours in the ship,” but Jehoshaphat would not consent.
50 22:51 And Jehoshaphat went to rest with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in David’s City, and his son Jehoram succeeded him.
51 22:52 Ahaziah the son of Ahab became king over Israel at Samaria in the year twenty-four of King Jehoshaphat of Judah, and he reigned over Israel two years.
52 22:53 And he did what displeased Jehovah, and followed his father’s path and his mother’s, and the path of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel sin, 53 22:54 and worshiped the Baal and did reverence to him, and provoked Israel’s God Jehovah just as his father had done.
2 Kings
1 And Moab rebelled against Israel after Ahab’s death.
2 And Ahaziah fell through the lattice of his roof-chamber in Samaria, and suffered internal injuries; and he sent men with the commission “Go inquire of Baal-Zebub the god of ʽEkron whether I shall recover from this ailment of mine.” 3 And the Angel of Jehovah told Elijah the Tishbite “Go up to meet the messengers of the king of Samaria, and tell them ‘Is it for want of any such thing as a God in Israel that you are going to inquire of Baal-Zebub the god of ʽEkron? 4 therefore Jehovah says, The bed you have got into you shall not get out of, but die’”; and Elijah went away.
5 And the messengers went back to him, and he said to them “What does your coming back mean?” 6 and they said to him “A man came up to meet us and said to us ‘Go back to the king who sent you and tell him “Says Jehovah, Is it for want of any such thing as a God in Israel that you are sending to inquire of Baal-Zebub the god of ʽEkron? therefore the bed you have got into you shall not get out of, but die.”’” 7 And he said to them “What type of man was it that came up to meet you and told you these things?” 8 and they said to him “A hairy man with a leather breechclout tied round him”; and he said “It is Elijah the Tishbite,” 9 and sent a captain of fifty for him, with his fifty.
And he went up to him and found him sitting on a mountaintop, and told him “Man of God, the king has spoken: come down.” 10 And Elijah answered the captain of fifty “Well, if I am a man of God, let fire come down out of the sky and consume you and your fifty”; and it did.
11 And he tried again and sent another captain of fifty for him, with his fifty; and he told him “Man of God, by order of the king, come down at once”; 12 and Elijah answered him “If I am a man of God, let fire come down out of the sky and consume you and your fifty”; and it did.
13 And he tried again and sent a third captain of fifty with his fifty; and the third captain of fifty came and knelt in Elijah’s presence and made his petition to him in the words “Man of God, please regard my life and the lives of these servants of yours as of value; 14 fire has come down out of the sky and consumed the two other captains of fifties; but now regard my life as of value.” 15 And the Angel of Jehovah told Elijah “Go down with him, do not be afraid of him”; and he rose and went down with him to the king, 16 and told him “Says Jehovah, Since you sent messengers to inquire of Baal-Zebub the god of ʽEkron, therefore the bed you have got into you shall not get out of, but die.” 17 And he died in accordance with Jehovah’s prediction that Elijah gave.
18 And as to the rest of the history of Ahaziah, what he did, it is recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
2 And when Jehovah was taking Elijah up to the sky in a tempest, Elijah and Elishaʽ went out from the Gilgal, 2 and Elijah said to Elishaʽ “Stay here, because Jehovah has sent me to Bethel”; and Elishaʽ said “By Jehovah and by your life, I will not leave you”; and they went down to Bethel.
3 And the members of the prophets’ fellowship at Bethel came out to Elishaʽ and said to him “Do you know that today Jehovah is taking away your master from over you?” and he said “I know it myself: don’t talk.” 4 And Elijah said to him “Elishaʽ, stay here, because Jehovah has sent me to Jericho”; and he said “By Jehovah and by your life, I will not leave you”; and they came to Jericho.
5 And the members of the prophets’ fellowship at Jericho approached Elishaʽ and said to him “Do you know that today Jehovah is taking away your master from over you?” and he said “I know it myself; don’t talk.” 6 And Elijah said to him “Stay here, because Jehovah has sent me to the Jordan”; and he said “By Jehovah and by your life, I will not leave you”; and the two went on.
7 And fifty men, members of the prophets’ fellowship, went and stood opposite at a distance.
And the two stopped by the Jordan; 8 and Elijah took his mantle and rolled it up and struck the water, and the water split apart and the two went across dry-shod.
9 And when they had gone across, Elijah said to Elishaʽ “Ask for what I shall do for you before I am taken from you”; and Elishaʽ said “Let a double portion of your spirit come to me.” 10 And he said “You have asked for a hard thing: if you see me taken from you, have it so; and if not, you shall not.” 11 And as they went on, talking as they went, in came chariots of fire and ponies of fire and separated the two, and Elijah went up to the sky in a tempest, 12 with Elishaʽ looking on and crying out “Father, father, Israel’s chariots and cavalry!”
and he saw no more of him.
13 And he took hold of his clothes and tore them in two.
14 And he took up Elijah’s mantle, which had fallen off him, and went back and stood on the bank of the Jordan.
And he took Elijah’s mantle which had fallen off him and struck the water, and said “Where is Elijah’s God Jehovah, O where?” and he struck the water, and the water split apart and Elishaʽ went across.
15 And the members of the prophets’ fellowship at Jericho saw it, and said “Elijah’s spirit rests on Elishaʽ,” and came to meet him and put their heads to the ground in reverence to him; 16 and they said to him “Here, your servants have with them fifty stalwart men: let them go and look for your master, in case Jehovah’s spirit should have lifted him away and thrown him on one of the mountains or in one of the valleys.”
And he said “You shall not send.” 17 But they urged him till it grew awkward, and he said “Send them”; and they sent fifty men, and they searched three days, but did not find him.
18 And they came back to him, while he was staying at Jericho; and he said to them “Did I not tell you ‘Do not go’?”
19 And the men of the city said to Elishaʽ “Here, the site of the city is good, as you see, but the water is bad and the country goes childless.” 20 And he said “Fetch me a new saucer, and put salt in it”; and they fetched it to him.
21 And he went out to where the water gushed out and threw in salt and said “Says Jehovah, I make this water wholesome: there shall no longer be disease and childlessness from it.” 22 And the water became wholesome and remains so to this day, in accordance with the promise given by Elishaʽ.
23 And he went up from there to Bethel.
And as he was on the way up, small boys came out of a city and gibed at him, and said to him “Go up, baldhead; go up, baldhead”; 24 and he turned round and saw them, and cursed them in Jehovah’s name.
And two she-bears came out of the Badlands and mangled forty-two children there.
25 And from Bethel he went to Mount Carmel, and from there back to Samaria.
3:1-27
3 And Jehoram the son of Ahab became king over Israel at Samaria in the year eighteen of Jehoshaphat as king of Judah, and he reigned twelve years.
2 And he did what displeased Jehovah, only not like his father and mother: he removed the Baal obelisk that his father had made; 3 only he stuck to the sin of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel sin; he did not turn from it.
4 And King Meshaʽ of Moab was a breeder of short-legged sheep, and had been paying the king of Israel a hundred thousand lambs and a hundred thousand rams in wool; 5 but when Ahab died the king of Moab rebelled against the king of Israel.
6 And King Jehoram went out of Samaria on that day and mustered the Israelites and went.
7 And he sent word to King Ahaziah, of Judah “The king of Moab has rebelled against me; will you go to Moab with me for the war?”
And he said “Yes, I will do the same as you do, my people the same as your people, my ponies the same as your ponies.”
8 And he said “Which way shall we go up?” and he said “By way of the wilderness of Edom”; 9 and the king of Israel and the king of Judah and the king of Edom went.
And they made a seven days’ circuit; and there was no water for the army and for the beasts in the rear.
10 And the king of Israel said “O, O!
Jehovah has called these three kings to give them into the hands of the Moabites!” 11 And the king of Judah said “Is there no prophet of Jehovah’s here for us to inquire of Jehovah from?” and one of the king of Israel’s officers answered “Elishaʽ the son of Shaphat is here, who poured water on Elijah’s hands.” 12 And the king of Judah said “He has Jehovah’s word with him”; and the king of Israel and the king of Judah and the king of Edom went down to him.
13 And Elishaʽ said to the king of Israel “What business have you with me? go to your father’s prophets and to your mother’s.”
And the king of Israel said to him “Do not say that, because Jehovah has called these three kings to give them into the hands of the Moabites.” 14 And Elishaʽ said “By Jehovah of Armies, in whose service I am, if it were not that I am willing to favor the king of Judah I would not look at you nor see you.
15 But now get me a musician.”
(When the musician played, Jehovah’s hand would be on him.) 16 And he said “Says Jehovah, Make this arroyo all trenches.
17 For, says Jehovah, you shall not see wind nor rain, but this arroyo shall be filled with water, and you and your armies and your beasts shall drink.
18 And Jehovah looks on this as too trifling a thing: he will give the Moabites into your hands, 19 and you shall sack every fortified city, and fell every good tree, and choke up all springs of water, and gall every piece of good ground with stones.”
20 And in the morning, at the time for making the offering, water was coming from the direction of Edom, and the ground was filled with water.
21 And all the Moabites had heard that the kings had gone up to fight them, and they had come out in arms, everyone who was old enough to wear a belt, and were standing at the boundary; 22 and the first thing in the morning, the sun having risen on the water, the Moabites saw the water over there looking red like blood, 23 and said “That is blood; the kings have been and fallen foul of each other and killed each other off: now to the plunder, Moab!” 24 and they came into the Israelite camp.
And the Israelites rose to their feet and attacked the Moabites, and they ran from them.
And they went in, killing the Moabites as they went in, 25 and demolishing the cities, and throwing a stone apiece on every lot of good ground and filling it, and choking up every spring of water, and felling every good tree, till they left the walls of Kir-Haresheth standing.
But the slingers surrounded it and beat it up; 26 and the king of Moab saw that the fighting was too hard for him, and he took with him seven hundred swordsmen to break through to the king of Edom, but they could not.
27 And he took his eldest son, who was to succeed him, and offered him as a burnt-offering on the wall; and there came great wrath over Israel, and they moved away, raising the siege, and went back to their own country.
4:1-44
4 And a certain woman, the widow of a member of the prophets’ fellowship, complained to Elishaʽ “Your servant my husband is dead; and you know your servant was a fearer of Jehovah; and a creditor has come to take my two boys for slaves.” 2 And Elishaʽ said to her “What shall I do for you?
Tell me what you have in the house.”
And she said “Your servant has nothing at all in the house but a flask of oil.” 3 And he said “Go borrow jars from outside, from all your neighbors
empty jars; don’t scrimp yourself.
4 And go in and shut the door on yourself and your sons, and pour, oil into those jars, and set aside what gets full.” 5 And she went from him and did so; and she shut the door on herself and her sons, they bringing to her and she pouring; 6 and when the jars were full she said to her son “Bring me another jar,” and he said to her “There isn’t any,” and the oil stopped.
7 And she came and told the man of God, and he said “Go sell the oil and pay your debt, and maintain your sons on what is left.”
8 And one day Elishaʽ went over to Shunem; and there was a wealthy woman there, who detained him to take a meal; and it came about that as often as he went past he turned in to take a meal.
9 And she said to her husband “Here, I have found out that he is a holy man of God who is always passing by us: 10 let us make a little upper room on the wall, and put a bed and a table and a chair and a lamp there for him, and have him turn in there when he comes to us.”
11 And one day he came there and turned in to the upper room and slept there.
12 And he said to his man Gehazi “Call this Shunammite lady”; and he called her, and she came standing before him, 13 and he said to him “Say to her ‘Here you have taken all this trouble for us
what has to be done for you? have you occasion for my speaking to the king or the general?’”
and she said “I live among my own people.” 14 And he said “Well, what is there to do for her?” and Gehazi said “Why, she has no son, and her husband is old.” 15 And he said “Call her”; and he called her, and she came standing in the doorway, 16 and he said “At this season next year you shall be embracing a son”; and she said “Don’t, sir, don’t lie to your servant.” 17 And the woman conceived, and had a son at the season Elishaʽ had promised her.
18 And the child grew; and one day he went out to his father where the reapers were.
19 And he said to his father “My head, my head!” and he said to a man “Carry him to his mother.” 20 And he took him up and brought him to his mother; and he sat in her lap till noon, and then died.
21 And she went up and laid him on the man of God’s bed, and shut the door on him, 22 and went out and called to her husband “Send me one of the boys and one of the donkeys, to make a quick run to the man of God and back.” 23 And he said “How is it you are going to him? it is neither new moon nor sabbath today”; but she said “It is all right.” 24 And she saddled the donkey and said to her boy “Drive ahead; do not slow down the pace unless I tell you to”; 25 and off she went, and came to the man of God at Mount Carmel.
And when the man of God saw her in the distance he said to his man Gehazi “Here is yonder Shunammite lady: 26 now run to meet her, and ask her ‘Are you all right? is your husband all right? is the child all right?’”
And she said “Yes,” 27 and came to the mountain to the man of God and took hold of his feet.
And Gehazi approached to push her away; but the man of God said “Let her alone, because she has an aching heart and Jehovah has left me in the dark and not told me.” 28 And she said “Did I ask you for a son, sir? didn’t I say ‘don’t delude me’?”
29 And he said to Gehazi “Belt yourself up and take my staff in your hand, and go: when you find a man do not bless him, and when a man blesses you do not answer him; and lay my staff on the boy’s face.” 30 And the boy’s mother said “By Jehovah and by your life, I will not leave you”; and he rose and followed her.
31 And Gehazi went over before them and laid the staff on the boy’s face, but he made no sound and took no notice; and he came back to meet him and told him the boy had not waked up.
32 And Elishaʽ came to the house and found the boy dead, lying on his bed.
33 And he went in and shut the door on the two of them, and prayed to Jehovah; 34 and he got up on the bed and lay down on the child, and laid his mouth on his, and his eyes on his, and his hands on his, and crouched over him; and the child’s flesh grew warm.
35 And he walked again the length of the house and back, and got up and crouched over him; and the boy sneezed seven times and opened his eyes.
36 And he called Gehazi and said “Call this Shunammite lady”; and he called her, and she came to him, and he said “Take up your son.” 37 And she went in and threw herself down at his feet and put her head to the ground in reverence, and took up her son and went out.
38 And Elishaʽ went back to the Gilgal, and the famine was in the country.
And the members of the prophets’ fellowship were sitting before him; and he said to his man “Put the great pot on and stew a mess for the fellowship.” 39 And one went out on the range to gather greens, and found a vine and gathered his cloak full of gourds from it, and came and sliced them into the pot of stew, because they did not know them.
40 And they poured it out for the men; and when they ate some of the stew they cried out “There is death in the pot, man of God,” and could not eat it.
41 And he said “Then get meal”; and he threw it into the pot and said “Pour out for the people and let them eat”; and there was no harm in the pot.
42 And a man came from Baal-Shalishah and brought the man of God firstfruit-bread, twenty barley cakes and green ears of grain, in his sack; and he said “Give it to the people to eat.” 43 And his attendant said “What, set this before a hundred men?” but he said “Give it to the people and let them eat, for Jehovah says it will be a case of eating and leaving.” 44 And he set it before them, and they ate and left, in accordance with Jehovah’s promise.
5:1-27
5 And Naʽaman, the general of the Syrians, was an important man at court and influential, because by him Jehovah had given victory to Syria; and the man became a leper.
2 And the Syrians had gone out on raids and carried off out of the country of Israel a little girl, who had come into the service of Naʽaman’s wife; 3 and she said to her mistress “I wish master was before the prophet in Samaria, then he would restore him from his leprosy”; 4 and he went in and told his sovereign “The girl out of the country of Israel spoke thus and so.” 5 And the king of Syria said “Go ahead, and I will send a letter to the king of Israel.”
And he went, and took with him ten hundredweight of silver and three thousand ounces of gold and ten suits of clothes; 6 and he brought the letter to the king of Israel, “and now, when this letter comes to you, here I have sent my officer Naʽaman to you for you to restore him from his leprosy.”
7 And when the king of Israel read the letter he tore his clothes and said “Am I God, to send death and life, that this man is sending to me to restore a man from his leprosy? do just see for yourselves how he is picking a quarrel with me.” 8 And when Elishaʽ heard that the king of Israel had torn his clothes he sent word to the king “Why have you torn your clothes? let him come to me and he shall know there is a prophet in Israel.” 9 And Naʽaman came with his ponies and his chariots and halted at the door of Elishaʽ’s house; 10 and Elishaʽ sent word to him “Go and bathe seven times in the Jordan, and you shall have your flesh renew itself and become clean.” 11 And Naʽaman was incensed, and went off saying “Here I thought he was going to come out to me and stand and call on the name of his God and make passes with his hand and restore the leprous.
12 Are not Damascus’s rivers Abana and Parpar better than all the waters of Israel? might I not bathe in them and be clean?”
and he turned round and went off in an angry mood.
13 But his servants approached and spoke to him, saying “If the prophet had told you a great thing you would do it, would you not? how much more when he says to you ‘Bathe and be clean’!” 14 And he went down and dipped in the Jordan seven times in accordance with Elishaʽ’s words, and his flesh renewed itself like a little child’s and he became clean.
15 And he went back to Elishaʽ, he and all his brigade, and went in and stood before him and said “There, I have found out that there is no God anywhere on earth except in Israel: accept a token of goodwill from your servant.” 16 But he said “By Jehovah, in whose service I am, I will not.”
And he urged him to accept it, but he refused.
17 And Naʽaman said “If not, let your servant be given a mule-team-load of earth; for your servant will no longer make burnt-offerings or sacrifices to other gods than Jehovah.
18 For this matter may Jehovah pardon your servant, when my sovereign goes into Rimmon’s house to do reverence there, leaning on my arm, and I do reverence in Rimmon’s house when he does reverence in Rimmon’s house, may Jehovah pardon your servant in this matter.” 19 And he said to him “Go, and good betide you”; and he went from him a considerable way.
20 And Elishaʽ’s man Gehazi said “Here my master has let off this Syrian Naʽaman, not taking at his hands what he brought; by Jehovah, but I will run after him and have something from him”; 21 and Gehazi gave chase to Naʽaman.
And Naʽaman saw him running after him, and dropped from his chariot to meet him and said “Is all well?” 22 And he said “All is well.
My master has sent me to say ‘Here there have just now come to me two young men from the highland of Ephraim, members of the prophets’ fellowship; please give me a hundredweight of silver for them.” 23 And Naʽaman said “Do take two hundredweight,” and urged him, and tied up two hundredweight of silver in two bags and gave it to his two servants, and they carried it before him.
24 And he came to the castle hill and took it out of their hands and stowed it in the house, and dismissed the men; and they went away, 25 and he went in and stood before his master.
And Elishaʽ said to him “Where have you been, Gehazi?” and he said “Your servant did not go anywhere at all.” 26 And he said to him “No? my mind went when a man turned from his chariot to meet you.
And now you have got the silver, and you have got clothes and olive-trees and vineyards and sheep and cattle and slaves 27 and Naʽaman’s leprosy, sticking to you and your descendants forever.”
And he went out from before him a snowy leper.
6:1-33
6 And the members of the prophets’ fellowship said to Elishaʽ “The place where we are living before you is too cramped for us; 2 let us go to the Jordan and get one timber apiece there and make ourselves a residence there.”
And he said “Go.” 3 And one said “Do go with your servants”; and he said “I will,” 4 and went with them; and they came to the Jordan and cut the wood.
5 And as one was felling a timber the iron ax-head dropped into the water; and he cried out “O, O, sir! and it was borrowed!” 6 And the man of God said “Where did it fall?” and he showed him the place.
And he cut a stick and threw it there, and it made the iron float; 7 and he said “Pick it up,” and he put out his hand and took it.
8 And the king of Syria was at war with Israel; and he concerted a plan with his officers, telling them “You will post yourselves in such and such a place,” 9 and Elishaʽ sent word to the king of Israel “Keep away from this place, because the Syrians are posted there,” 10 and the king of Israel sent to the place Elishaʽ had told him of; and he warned him, and he kept away from there, not once or twice.
11 And the king of Syria was in a fume over this, and called his officers and said to them “Will you not tell me which of our people is for the king of Israel?” 12 and one of his officers said “No, your majesty, but Elishaʽ, the prophet in Israel, tells the king of Israel the things you say in your bedroom.” 13 And he said “Go and see where he is, so that I can send and get him”; and they reported to him “He is at Dothan.” 14 And he sent there ponies and chariots and a formidable force, who came by night and encircled the city; 15 and when Elishaʽ rose and went out the first thing in the morning he found troops surrounding the city, and ponies and chariots; and his man said to him “O, O, sir, what shall we do?” 16 But he said “Do not be afraid, because there are more on our side than on theirs.” 17 And Elishaʽ prayed “Jehovah, open his eyes so that he will see”; and Jehovah opened the man’s eyes so that he saw, and he found the mountain full of ponies with chariots of fire around Elishaʽ.
18 And they came down to him; and Elishaʽ prayed to Jehovah “Strike these heathens with an illusion”; and he struck them with an illusion in accordance with Elishaʽ’s word.
19 And Elishaʽ said to them “This is not the way nor the city; follow me and I will take you to the man you are looking for”
and he took them to Samaria.
20 And when they came into Samaria Elishaʽ said “Jehovah, open these men’s eyes so that they will see”; and Jehovah opened their eyes so that they saw, and they found themselves in the middle of Samaria.
21 And the king of Israel said, when he saw them, “Shall I kill, shall I kill, father?” 22 But he said “You shall not; do you kill those whom you have taken prisoners by your sword and your bow? set bread and water before them and let them eat and drink and go to their sovereign.” 23 And he brought out a great collation for them, and they ate and drank; and he sent them off to their sovereign.
And no more Syrian raiders came into the country of Israel.
24 And after this King Ben-Hadad of Syria gathered his entire army and came up and besieged Samaria.
25 And there was a great famine in Samaria: they besieged it till a donkey’s head was priced at eighty shekels of silver and a pint of pigeons’ droppings at five shekels.
26 And as the king of Israel was passing along the wall, a woman called out to him “Help, your majesty!” 27 And he said “Jehovah help you not! how should I help you? out of the threshing-floor or the winepress?” 28 And the king said to her “What is the matter?” and she said “This woman said to me ‘Let us have your son to eat today, and we will eat mine tomorrow’; 29 and we boiled my son and ate him.
And next day I said to her ‘Let us have your son to eat,’ and she hid her son.” 30 And when the king heard the woman’s story he tore his clothes as he was passing along the wall, and the people saw that he had a sackcloth underneath on his flesh.
31 And he said “God do so to me, and more, if Elishaʽ the son of Shaphat keeps his head on his shoulders today”; 32 and Elishaʽ was sitting in his house, and the elders sitting with him.
And he sent one of the men he had before him; but when the messenger had not yet come to him he said to the elders “Do you see how this son of a murderer has sent to take off my head?
Look here: when the messenger comes, shut the door in his face; can you not hear his master’s feet behind him?” 33 While he was still speaking with them the king made his appearance, and said “Here we have from Jehovah this disaster, why should I wait for Jehovah any longer?”
7:1-20
7 But Elishaʽ said “Listen to Jehovah’s word.
Says Jehovah, Right away tomorrow, farina twelve quarts for a shekel and barley three pecks for a shekel in the gate of Samaria.” 2 And the adjutant on whose arm the king leaned answered Elishaʽ “Here is Jehovah making hatchways in the sky! will any such thing happen?” and he said “You will find yourself looking on at it but not eating any of it.”
3 And there were four men on the outside of the gate, lepers; and they said to each other “What are we sitting here till we die for? 4 If we think we will go into the city, when the famine is in the city, then we die there; and if we stay here, then we die; come on now, let us desert to the Syrian camp: if they spare our lives we shall live, and if they put us to death, then we die”; 5 and they rose in the morning twilight to go to the Syrian camp.
And they came to the edge of the Syrian camp and found that there was not a man there, 6 but the Lord had caused the Syrian army to hear a sound of chariots and of ponies, the sound of a large body of troops, and they had said to each other “Here the king of Israel has hired against us the kings of the Hittites and the kings of Egypt to come against us”
7 and they had made off in the morning twilight and left their tents and their donkeys, the camp as it was, and fled for their lives.
8 And these lepers came to the edge of the camp and went into a tent and ate and drank, and took away from there silver and gold and clothes and went and buried them, and went back and went into another tent and took things away from there and went and buried them.
9 And they said to each other “We are not doing right: this is a day of good news, and we are lying still and shall be waiting till morning daylight and suffering for it.
Come on now, let us report to the palace.” 10 And they came and called to the city gatemen, and told them “We have gone into the Syrian camp and found not a man there, nor a human sound, but the ponies tied and the donkeys tied and the tents as they were.” 11 And the gatemen called out and reported it to the palace inside; 12 and the king got up in the night and said to his officers “Let me tell you what the Syrians have done with us: they know we are starving, and they have gone out of the camp to hide out in the country, thinking ‘When they come out of the city we shall capture them alive and get into the city.’” 13 But one of his officers answered “Then let them get out half a dozen of the remaining ponies that are left here
they are just like all the drove that are gone
and let us send and see.” 14 And they got out two teams of ponies, and the king sent them after the Syrian army, telling them “Go and see”; 15 and they went after them to the Jordan, and found all the road full of clothes and things that the Syrians had thrown away in their haste; and the messengers came back and reported to the king.
16 And the people went out and plundered the Syrian camp; and farina was twelve quarts for a shekel, and barley three pecks for a shekel, in accordance with Jehovah’s promise.
17 And the king put in charge of the gate the adjutant on whose arm he had leaned; and the people trampled him to death in the gate, as the man of God had predicted when the king came down to him.
18 As the man of God had said to the king “Barley shall be three pecks for a shekel, and farina twelve quarts for a shekel, in the gate of Samaria right away tomorrow,” 19 and the adjutant had answered the man of God “But here is Jehovah making hatchways in the sky; will such a thing as this happen?” and he had said “You are to see it with your own eyes, but you will not eat any of it,” 20 so it befell him: the people trampled him to death in the gate.
8:1-29
8 And Elishaʽ had told the woman whose son he had brought to life “Off with you, you and your family, and live abroad wherever you may, because Jehovah announces a famine”; and it did come upon the country for seven years.
2 And the woman bestirred herself and did in accordance with the words of the man of God, and went, she and her family, and lived abroad in the Philistine country seven years.
3 And at the end of seven years the woman came back from the Philistine country, and went out to appeal to the king for her house and her land.
4 And the king was talking with Gehazi, the servant of the man of God, and saying “Tell me all the miracles Elishaʽ did”; 5 and he was telling the king how Elishaʽ raised the dead, when the woman whose son he had raised made her appearance appealing to the king for her house and her land; and Gehazi said “Your majesty, this is the woman, and this is her son whom Elishaʽ raised.” 6 And the king questioned the woman, and she told him the story; and the king gave her an official with the commission “Restore everything that belonged to her, and all the produce of the land from the day she left the country till now.”
7 And Elishaʽ came to Damascus.
And King Ben-Hadad of Syria was sick; and he was told “The man of God is arriving here.” 8 And the king said to Hazael “Take with you a present and go to meet the man of God and inquire of Jehovah through him whether I shall recover from this sickness of mine”; 9 and Hazael went to meet him, and took a present with him, and forty camel-loads of all the best there was in Damascus, and came and stood before him and said “Your son King Ben-Hadad of Syria sends me to you with the question ‘Shall I recover from this sickness of mine?’” 10 And Elishaʽ said to him “Go tell him ‘You will.’
But Jehovah has showed me that he will die”; 11 and he stood aghast, with a fixed stare, till Hazael grew uncomfortable.
And the man of God wept; 12 and Hazael said “How is it that you weep, sir?” and he said “Because I know what you will do to the sons of Israel: you will set fire to their fortified cities, and kill their young men in warfare, and dash out their children’s brains, and cut open their pregnant women.” 13 And Hazael said “But what is a dog like your servant, to do this great thing?” and Elishaʽ said “Jehovah has showed me you king over Syria.” 14 And he went away from Elishaʽ and went in to his sovereign; and he said to him “What did Elishaʽ tell you?” and he said “He told me you would recover.” 15 And on the next day he took the coverlet and dipped it in water and spread it over his face, and he died, and Hazael succeeded him.
16 And in the year five of Jehoram the son of Ahab as king of Israel, Jehoram the son of King Jehoshaphat of Judah became king.
17 He was thirty-two years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned eight years at Jerusalem.
18 And he followed the path of the kings of Israel, as the family of Ahab did, because he had Ahab’s daughter for his wife; and he did what displeased Jehovah.
19 And Jehovah was not willing to make away with Judah on account of his servant David, as he had told him he would give him a lamp before him through all time.
20 In his time Edom rebelled against the jurisdiction of Judah, and set up a king over themselves; 21 and Jehoram went over to Saghir, and all the chariots with him.
And he rose in the night and defeated the Edomites who had surrounded him and the captains of the chariots; but the people fled to their homes, 22 and Edom is in rebellion against the jurisdiction of Judah to this day.
Libnah rebelled then, at that time.
23 And as to the rest of the history of Jehoram, and all that he did, it is recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Judah.
24 And Jehoram went to rest with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in David’s City; and his son Ahaziah succeeded him.
25 In the year twelve of Jehoram the son of Ahab as king of Israel, Ahaziah the son of King Jehoram of Judah began to reign.
26 Ahaziah was twenty-two years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned one year at Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was ʽAthaliah the daughter of King ʽOmri of Israel.
27 And he followed the path of the family of Ahab, and did what displeased Jehovah like the family of Ahab, because he had married into Ahab’s family.
28 And he went with Joram the son of Ahab to war with King Hazael of Syria at Ramoth-Gilead; and the Syrians wounded Joram.
29 And King Joram went back to recover at Jezreʽel from the wounds the Syrians had given him in his fighting with King Hazael of Syria; and Ahaziah the son of Joram went down to see Joram at Jezreʽel, because he was sick.
9:1-37
9 And the prophet Elishaʽ called one of the members of the prophets’ fellowship and said to him “Belt yourself up and take this flask of oil in your hand and go to Ramoth-Gilead; 2 and when you get there find out Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi there, and go in and have him get up from among his mates, and take him into a closet 3 and take the flask of oil and pour it on his head and say ‘Says Jehovah, I anoint you king over Israel,’ and open the door and be off without waiting.” 4 And the young man (the prophet) went to Ramoth-Gilead, 5 and when he got there he found the captains of the army sitting together, and said “I have an errand to you, captain.”
And Jehu said “To which of us all?” and he said “You, captain”; 6 and he rose and went into the house.
And he poured the oil on his head and said to him “Says Jehovah the God of Israel, I anoint you king over Israel, Jehovah’s people; 7 and you shall kill off the family of your master Ahab, and I will make Jezebel 8 and all Ahab’s family pay for the blood of my servants the prophets and the blood of all the Jehovah-worshipers, and will exterminate every male person that belongs to Ahab, barred and unbarred in Israel, 9 and make Ahab’s family like the families of Jeroboam the son of Nebat and Baʽasha the son of Ahijah; 10 and Jezebel the dogs shall eat on Jezreʽel common, with nobody burying her”
and he opened the door and was off.
11 And Jehu went out to the officers, and they said to him “Is everything all right? how came this lunatic to come to you?”
And he said to them “You know the man and his concern.” 12 And they said “You lie; tell us.”
And he said “He said like this to me: ‘Says Jehovah, I anoint you king over Israel.’” 13 And in haste they took their cloaks and laid them under him on the bare steps and blew the ram-horn and said “Jehu is king!” 14 And Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi organized a revolution against Joram.
Joram had been in garrison at Ramoth-Gilead, he and all Israel, for fear of King Hazael of Syria; 15 but Joram had gone back to recover at Jezreʽel from the wounds the Syrians had given him in his fighting with King Hazael of Syria.
And Jehu said “If it is your mind, let nobody get out of the city to go and tell at Jezreʽel”; 16 and Jehu rode off to Jezreʽel, for Joram was abed there, and King Ahaziah of Judah had come down to see Joram.
17 And there was a watchman standing on the tower at Jezreʽel; and he saw Jehu’s cloud of dust as he came, and said “I see a cloud of dust”; and Joram said “Get a chariot-rider and send him to meet them and say “Is all well?” 18 And a pony-rider went to meet him and said “Says the king, Is all well?” and Jehu said “What business of yours is all’s being well? turn in behind me.”
And the watchman reported “The messenger came to them and did not come back”; 19 and he sent a second pony-rider, and he came to them and said “Says the king, All well?” and Jehu said “What business of yours is all’s being well? turn in behind me.” 20 And the watchman reported “He came to them and did not come back; and the driving is like Jehu the son of Nimshi’s driving, for he drives furiously.”
21 And Joram said “Harness!” and his chariot was harnessed, and King Joram of Israel and King Ahaziah of Judah went out in their chariots to meet Jehu.
And they met him on Naboth the Jezreʽelite’s lot; 22 and when Joram saw Jehu he said “Is all well, Jehu?” and he said “What is all well while your mother Jezebel’s loose living and witchcraft go on at such a rate?” 23 And Joram turned his ponies and fled, saying to Ahaziah “Treachery, Ahaziah!” 24 but Jehu drew an arrow to the head and hit Joram between the shoulders, the arrow coming out at his heart, and he collapsed in his chariot.
25 And he said to his adjutant Bidkar “Take him up and throw him into Naboth the Jezreʽelite’s lot; because I remember you and I were riding paired behind his father Ahab, and Jehovah pronounced this sentence on him, 26 ‘I did see the blood of Naboth and of his sons yesterday, quoth Jehovah, and I will pay you back in this lot, quoth Jehovah’; now take him up and throw him into the lot as Jehovah said.”
27 And King Ahaziah of Judah saw it and fled toward Beth-hag-Gan; and Jehu pursued him and said “Him too,” and they hit him in the chariot going up Gur Hill near Ibleam; and he got away to Megiddo, and died there.
28 And his officers took him to Jerusalem in the chariot and buried him in his grave in David’s City.
29 It was in the eleventh year of Joram the son of Ahab that Ahaziah came to the throne of Judah.
30 And Jehu came to Jezreʽel; and Jezebel had heard, and she put antimony round her eyes and did up her hair and looked out of the window 31 as Jehu was coming in at the gate, and said “Is all well, Zimri that killed his master?” 32 And he turned up his face to the window and said “Who is with me, who?” and two or three eunuchs looked out.
33 And he said “Fling her down”; and they flung her down, and drops of her blood splashed on the wall and on the ponies, and they trampled her.
34 And he went in and ate and drank, and said “Look after that cursed creature and bury her, because she was a princess”; 35 and they went to bury her, but found nothing of her but the skull and legs and hands.
36 And they went back and told him, and he said “It is Jehovah’s prediction that he made by Elijah the Tishbite, ‘On the common of Jezreʽel dogs shall eat the flesh of Jezebel; 37 and Jezebel’s carcass shall be like dung lying out on the range, nobody saying “This is Jezebel.”’”
10:1-36
10 And there were seventy sons of Ahab’s at Samaria; and Jehu wrote letters and sent them to Samaria to the captains of the city and the elders and the foster-fathers of Ahab’s sons, reading 2 “And now, when this letter reaches you, you having with you your sovereign’s sons, and the chariots and ponies, and a fortified city, and the arsenal, 3 pick out the best and most suitable of your sovereign’s sons and set him on his father’s throne and fight for your sovereign’s house.” 4 But they were very badly afraid, and said “Here the two kings did not stand before him, and how should we?” 5 and the steward of the palace and the provost of the city and the elders and the foster-fathers sent to Jehu “We are your subjects and will do whatever you tell us; we will not make anybody king; do as you think best.” 6 And he wrote them a second letter, “If you are for me and will obey me, take the heads of your sovereign’s sons and come to me at Jezreʽel right away tomorrow.”
And the princes, seventy men, were with the wealthiest men of the city, who were bringing them up.
7 And when the letter reached them they took the princes and cut their throats, seventy men, and put their heads in baskets and sent to him at Jezreʽel; 8 and men came and told him “They have brought the princes’ heads,” and he said “Put them in two piles at the gate till morning.” 9 And in the morning he went out and stood and said to all the people “You are honest men; here I plotted against my sovereign and killed him
and who killed all these? 10 Take it for a fact that no part of Jehovah’s prediction that he made against Ahab’s family shall fall to the ground, and Jehovah has done what he predicted by his servant Elijah.” 11 And Jehu killed all that were left in Jezreʽel of Ahab’s family, and all his kinsmen and intimates and priests, till he had left no survivor to him; 12 and off he went to Samaria.
13 He was at Beth-ʽEked-ha-Roʽim on the road when he found the brothers of King Ahaziah of Judah; and he said “Who are your?” and they said “We are Ahaziah’s brothers, and have come down to pay a visit to the princes.” 14 And he said “Take them alive”; and they took them alive, and cut their throats and let the blood run into the Beth-ʽEked cistern, forty-two men; he did not leave a man of them.
15 And he went on from there, and found Jonadab the son of Recab coming to meet him; and he greeted him with a blessing.
And he said to him “Is your heart squarely with me as mine is with yours?”
(And Jonadab said “It is.”)
“That being so, give me your hand”; and he gave him his hand, and he took him up into the chariot where he was, 16 and said “Come with me and see my jealousy for Jehovah.”
And he carried him with him in the chariot, 17 and came to Samaria and killed all of Ahab’s blood that were left in Samaria till he rooted out the line in accordance with Jehovah’s prediction which he had made to Elijah.
18 And Jehu gathered all the people and said to them “Ahab worshiped the Baal on a small scale; Jehu will do it on a great scale; 19 now summon to me all the Baal’s prophets and priests, let not a man be missing, because I have a big sacrifice to kill for the Baal; anyone who is not in his place shall not live”; but Jehu was playing a trick in order to destroy the Baal-worshipers.
20 And Jehu said “Ordain a national holiday for the Baal”; and they called it, 21 and Jehu sent throughout Israel, and all the Baal-worshipers came, not a man being left who did not, and went into the Baal’s house, and the Baal’s house was filled from portal to portal.
22 And Jehu said to the vesturer “Bring out clothes for all the worshipers of the Baal”; and he brought out clothes for them.
23 And Jehu and Jonadab the son of Recab went into the Baal’s house, and he said to the Baal-worshipers “Search and see that there are none of the Jehovah-worshipers here with you, but only Baal-worshipers”; 24 and they went in to make sacrifices and burnt-offerings.
And Jehu had stationed eighty men outside, and had said “Whoever allows any of the men I turn over to you to escape, his life goes in place of his.” 25 And when he had finished making the burnt-offering, Jehu said to the runners and the adjutants “Come in! down with them! let no one get out!” and they massacred them and threw them on the ground, and went clear to the wall of the Baal’s house.
26 And they brought out the obelisk of the Baal and burned it; 27 and they pulled down the Baal’s house and made it a site of latrines, which it is until today.
28 And Jehu rooted out the Baal from Israel; 29 only the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel sin, Jehu did not turn from following
the golden calves at Bethel and at Dan.
30 And Jehovah said to Jehu “Since you did what I approve and did it well, did to Ahab’s family just as I had in mind, great-great-grandchildren of yours shall sit on the throne of Israel.” 31 But Jehu did not take care to go by the code of Israel’s God Jehovah with all his heart; he did not turn away from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel sin.
32 In those days Jehovah began to be tired of Israel, and Hazael made havoc of them in all Israel’s territory 33 from the Jordan eastward, all the country of Gilead, the Gadites and the Reubenites and the Manassites, from ʽAroʽer by Arnon Arroyo on, and Gilead and the Bashan.
34 And as to the rest of the history of Jehu, and all that he did, and all his exploits, they are recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
35 And Jehu went to rest with his fathers, and they buried him in Samaria; and his son Jehoahaz succeeded him.
36 And the time that Jehu had reigned over Israel was twenty-eight years, at Samaria.
11:1-21
11 And Ahaziah’s mother ʽAthaliah saw that her son was dead, and she stood up and destroyed all of the royal blood.
2 But King Joram’s daughter Jehoshebaʽ, Abaziah’s sister, took Ahaziah’s son Joash and spirited him away from among the princes who were being dispatched, and put him and his nurse in the bedding-closet, and they concealed him from ʽAthaliah and he was not put to death.
3 And he was with her in Jehovah’s house in hiding for six years, and ʽAthaliah reigned over the country.
4 And in the seventh year Jehojadaʽ sent and fetched the captains of the Carians and the runners and had them come to him in Jehovah’s house, and he made an agreement with them and had them swear by Jehovah’s house, and let them see the prince; 5 and he gave them orders, “This is the thing you are to do; the third of you that go in on the sabbath and keep guard at the palace, 6
7 and the two thirds of you that all come out on the sabbath and keep guard at Jehovah’s house, 8 shall encircle the king weapon in hand, and whoever comes in up to the cordon shall be put to death; be with the king when he goes out and when he goes in.” 9 And the captains did just as Jehojadaʽ ordered them, and each fetched his men, those who went in on the sabbath with those who came out on the sabbath, and came to Priest Jehojadaʽ, 10 and the priest gave the captains the spears and bucklers that had belonged to King David, that were in Jehovah’s house, 11 and the runners stood weapon in hand from the southeast corner of the house to the northeast corner, for the altar and the house, around the king; 12 and he brought out the prince and put on him the diadem and the armlets, and they declared him king and anointed him, and clapped their hands and said “Long live the king!”
13 And ʽAthaliah heard the voices of the people, and came to the people in Jehovah’s house 14 and saw the scene: there was the king standing by the pillar according to usage, and the captains and the trumpets beside the king, and all the populace rejoicing and blowing trumpets; and ʽAthaliah tore her garments and cried out “Treason! treason!” 15 And Priest Jehojadaʽ gave orders to the captains, the officers of the forces, “Let her out inside the cordon, and put to the sword anyone that goes in after her”; for the priest thought “She must not be put to death in Jehovah’s house.” 16 And they stood away from her, and she went into the driveway to the palace and was put to death there.
17 And Jehojadaʽ made a covenant between Jehovah and the king and the people, that they should be Jehovah’s people and for constitutional relations between the king and the people.
18 And all the populace went into the Baal’s house and tore it down, thoroughly broke to pieces its altars and images, and killed Mattan, the priest of the Baal, in front of the altars.
19 And the priest set guards over Jehovah’s house, and took the captains and the Carians and the runners and the whole populace, and they brought the king down from Jehovah’s house and into the palace by way of the runners’ gate, and he took his seat on the royal throne; 20 and all the populace rejoiced, and the city quieted down; and ʽAthaliah they put to death by the sword in the palace.
21 Joash was seven years old at his accession to the throne,
12 and reigned forty years at Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Sibjah, from Beer-Shebaʽ.
2 And Joash did what Jehovah approved all his life, Priest Jehojadaʽ instructing him.
3 Only the heights were not removed; the people still sacrificed and made burnings on the heights.
4 And Joash said to the priests “All the sacred money that is brought to Jehovah’s house in cash, each man’s tax on polls and all the money that each voluntarily brings to Jehovah’s house, 5 the priests are to take for themselves, each from his acquaintances, and they are to repair the damages of the house, whatever part damages are found in.” 6 But in the year twenty-three of King Joash the priests had not repaired the damages of the house, 7 and King Joash summoned Priest Jehojadaʽ and the priests and said to them “How comes it you are not repairing the damages of the house? now you are not to take money from your acquaintances, but to let us have it for the damages of the house.” 8 And the priests agreed to not taking money from the people and not repairing the damages of the house.
9 And Priest Jehojadaʽ took a chest and bored a hole in its lid and put it beside the altar on the right as a man goes into Jehovah’s house, and there the priests who acted as threshold-keepers put all the money that was brought to Jehovah’s house.
10 And when they saw that there was a great amount of money in the chest the king’s secretary for documents and the high priest came up and wrapped and counted the money that was found in Jehovah’s house.
11 And they put the appropriated money into the hands of the contractors employed on Jehovah’s house, and they paid it out to the carpenters and builders that worked on Jehovah’s house 12 and to the masons and stonecutters and for buying wood and dressed stone to repair the damages of the house, and for all expenses on the house for repairing; 13 only there were not made in Jehovah’s house silver basins, snuffers, bowls, any articles of gold or of silver, out of the money that was brought to Jehovah’s house, 14 but it was given to the contractors, and they repaired Jehovah’s house with it.
15 And no accounts were demanded from the men into whose hands the money was put to be given to the workmen, but they worked on honor.
16 Money paid in expiation for guilt or propitiation for sin was not brought to Jehovah’s house; it belonged to the priests.
17 Then King Hazael of Syria came up and attacked Gath, and took it; and Hazael faced toward Jerusalem.
18 And King Joash of Judah took all the sacred things dedicated by his ancestors Kings Jehoshaphat, Joram, and Ahaziah of Judah, and by him himself, and all the gold to be found in the treasuries of Jehovah’s house and of the royal palace, and sent it to King Hazael of Syria, and he withdrew from his campaign against Jerusalem.
19 And as to the rest of the history of Joash, and all that he did, it is recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Judah.
20 And his officer entered into a conspiracy, and killed Joash at Beth-Millo that goes down to Silla; 21 and it was his officers Jozacar the son of Shimeath and Jozabad the son of Shomer who killed him.
And they buried him with his fathers in David’s City, and his son Amasiah succeeded him.
13 In the year twenty-three of Joash the son of Ahaziah as king of Judah, Jehoahaz the son of Jehu became king over Israel for a reign of seventeen years at Samaria; 2 and he did what displeased Jehovah, and followed the sin of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel sin; he did not turn from it.
3 And Jehovah was angry with Israel, and he gave them into the hands of King Hazael of Syria, and Hazael’s son Ben-Hadad, all the time.
4 And Jehoahaz took steps to propitiate Jehovah; and Jehovah listened to him, because he saw Israel’s oppressed condition, for the king of Syria had crowded them hard; 5 and Jehovah gave Israel a deliverer, who brought them out from under the hand of Syria, and the sons of Israel lived in their homes as they used to.
6 (Only they did not turn from the sin of the family of Jeroboam who made Israel sin; they walked in it, and the asherah too was standing in Samaria.) 7 For he had not left to Jehoahaz any men but fifty horsemen and ten chariots and ten thousand infantry; for the king of Syria had destroyed them and taken them for dust to trample on.
8 And as to the rest of the history of Jehoahaz, and all that he did, and his exploits, they are recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
9 And Jehoahaz went to rest with his fathers, and they buried him in Samaria; and his son Joash succeeded him.
10 In the year thirty-nine of Joash as king of Judah, Joash the son of Jehoahaz became king over Israel for a reign of sixteen years at Samaria; 11 and he did what displeased Jehovah, he did not turn from all the sin of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel sin; in it he walked.
12 And as to the rest of the history of Joash, and all that he did, and his exploits of fighting with King Amasiah of Judah, they are recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
13 And Joash went to rest with his fathers, and his son Jeroboam took his seat on his throne; and Joash was buried at Samaria with the kings of Israel.
14 And Elishaʽ was taken with his last illness; and King Joash of Israel went down and shed tears over his face and said “Father, father, Israel’s chariots and cavalry!” 15 And Elishaʽ said to him “Fetch a bow and arrows”; and he fetched a bow and arrows to him.
16 And he said to the king “Take the bow ready for shooting”; and he did, and Elishaʽ put his own hands on the king’s hands.
17 And he said “Open the window”; and it was opened, and Elishaʽ said “Shoot,” and he shot.
And he said “A victory-arrow for Jehovah! a victory-arrow against Syria! you shall defeat the Syrians at Aphek till you finish them.” 18 And he said “Take the arrows,” and he did; and he said to the king “Strike on the ground,” and he struck three times and stopped.
19 And the man of God was incensed against him, and said “Striking five or six times, then you would have defeated the Syrians till you had finished them; but now you are to defeat the Syrians three times.” 20 And Elishaʽ died, and they buried him.
And the raiders from Moab were coming into the country; 21 and they were burying a man, when they saw the raiders and threw the man into Elishaʽ’s tomb and went off; and the man touched Elishaʽ’s bones and came to life and stood up on his feet.
22 And King Hazael of Syria crowded the Israelites hard throughout the life of Jehoahaz; 23 and Hazael took Philistia out of his hands fro the western sea to Aphek.
And Jehovah was gracious to them and took pity on them and turned toward them, on account of his covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and was not willing to make away with them, and did not throw them aside from before his face; 24 and King Hazael of Syria died, and his son Ben-Hadad succeeded him, 25 and Joash the son of Jehoahaz retook out of the hands of Hazael’s son Ben-Hadad the cities Hazael had taken in war out of the hands of his father Jehoahaz.
Three times Joash defeated him, and recovered the Israelite cities.
14:1-29
14 In the year two of Joash the son of Jehoahaz as king of Israel, Amasiah the son of King Joash of Judah became king; 2 he was twenty-five years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned twenty-nine years at Jerusalem.
And his mother’s name was Jehoʽaddan, from Jerusalem.
3 And he did what Jehovah approved, only not as his father David had: he did just as his father Joash had
4 only the heights were not removed, the people still sacrificed and made burnings on the heights.
5 And when he had the kingship firmly in his hands, he killed his officers who had killed the king his father, 6 but the assassins’ children he did not put to death, in accordance with what is written in the code of Moses, what Jehovah commanded, “Fathers shall not be put to death for children, nor children for fathers, but each shall be put to death for his own sin.” 7 It was he who defeated Edom in Salt Valley, killing ten thousand, and took Selaʽ by storm and gave it the name Joktheel, which it bears to this day.
8 Then Amasiah sent envoys to Joash the son of Jehoahaz the son of Jehu, the king of Israel, with the message “Come, let us come face to face.” 9 And King Joash of Israel sent word to King Amasiah of Judah “The brier in the Lebanon sent word to the cedar in the Lebanon ‘Give my son your daughter as wife’; and the wild beasts in the Lebanon came by and trampled the brier.
10 You have defeated Edom, and you are feeling confident: enjoy your glory and stay at home; why should you challenge trouble, and fall, and Judah with you?” 11 But Amasiah would not listen; and the king of Israel came up, and they came face to face at Beth-Shemesh, which belongs to Judah.
12 And the Judahites were beaten by the Israelites, and fled to their homes.
13 And King Joash of Israel captured Amasiah the son of Joash the son of Ahaziah at Beth-Shemesh, and brought him to Jerusalem and breached the wall of Jerusalem for two hundred yards, from the Ephraim Gate to the Corner Gate.
14 And he took all the gold and silver, and all the articles that were found in Jehovah’s house and in the palace treasuries, and the hostages, and went back to Samaria.
15 And as to the rest of the history of Joash, what he did and his exploits, and the war he had with King Amasiah of Judah, they are recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
16 And Joash went to rest with his fathers, and was buried at Samaria with the kings of Israel, and his son Jeroboam succeeded him.
17 And Amasiah the son of Joash, the king of Judah, lived fifteen years after the death of Joash the son of Jehoahaz, the king of Israel.
18 And as to the rest of the history of Amasiah, it is recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Judah.
19 And they organized a revolution against him at Jerusalem; and he fled to Lakish, and they sent to Lakish after him and put him to death there.
20 And they took him away on ponies, and he was buried at Jerusalem in David’s City with his fathers.
21 And all the people of Judah took ʽAzariah, who was sixteen years old, and installed him as successor to his father Amasiah.
22 He fortified Elath, and reannexed it to Judah, after the king had gone to rest with his fathers.
23 In the year fifteen of Amasiah the son of Joash as king of Judah, Jeroboam the son of King Joash of Israel became king for a reign of forty-one years at Samaria; 24 and he did what displeased Jehovah, he did not turn from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel sin.
25 He recovered Israel’s territory from Lebo-Hamath to the Dead Sea, in accordance with the prediction of Israel’s God Jehovah which he made by his servant the prophet Jonah the son of Amittai, of Gath-Hepher.
26 For Jehovah saw how very bitter was Israel’s wretched state, and how there was nobody unbarred and nobody barred, and no helper for Israel; 27 and Jehovah did not say the word to obliterate Israel’s name from under the heavens, but saved them through Jeroboam the son of Joash.
28 And as to the rest of the history of Jeroboam, and all that he did, and his exploits in warring and reannexing Damascus and Hamath to Israel, they are recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
29 And Jeroboam went to rest with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel, and his son Zecariah succeeded him.
15:1-38
15 In the year twenty-seven of King Jeroboam of Israel, ʽAzariah the son of King Amasiah of Judah became king; 2 he was twenty-six years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned fifty-two years at Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Jecoliah, from Jerusalem.
3 And he did what Jehovah approved, just as his father Amasiah had; 4 only the heights were not removed: the people still sacrificed and made burnings on the heights.
5 And Jehovah marred the king, and he became leprous to the day of his death, and lived in the exempt house, while Crown Prince Jotham, as steward of the palace, acted as regent.
6 And as to the rest of the history of ʽAzariah, and all that he did, it is recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Judah.
7 And ʽAzariah went to rest with his fathers, and they buried him with his fathers in David’s City; and his son Jotham succeeded him.
8 In the year thirty-eight of King ʽAzariah of Judah, Zecariah the son of Jeroboam became king over Israel for a reign of six months at Samaria; 9 and he did what displeased Jehovah, as his fathers had; he did not turn from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel sin.
10 And Shallum the son of Jabesh organized a revolution against him, and assassinated him at Ibleam, and succeeded him.
11 And the rest of the history of Zecariah will be found recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
12 It was Jehovah’s prediction that he had made to Jehu: “great-great-grandchildren of yours shall sit on the throne of Israel,” he had said, and so it was.
13 Shallum the son of Jabesh became king in the year thirty-nine of King ʽAzariah of Judah, and reigned a month at Samaria; 14 but Menahem the son of Gadi went up from Tirsah and came to Samaria and assassinated Shallum the son of Jabesh at Samaria, and succeeded him.
15 And the rest of the history of Shallum, and his revolution that he organized, will be found recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
16 Then Menahem ravaged Tappuah and everything in it, and all its territory, starting from Tirsah, because they did not open to him: he ravaged it and cut open its pregnant women.
17 In the year thirty-nine of King ʽAzariah of Judah, Menahem the son of Gadi became king over Israel for a reign of ten years at Samaria; 18 and he did what displeased Jehovah, did not turn off from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel sin.
19 In his time King Pul of Assyria came up against the country, and Menahem gave Pul a thousand hundredweight of silver to have his cooperation for getting the kingship firmly into his hands; 20 and Menahem assessed the money on Israel, on all the solid men, having them give the king of Assyria fifty shekels per man; and the king of Assyria went back and did not stay there in the country.
21 And as to the rest of the history of Menahem, and all that he did, it is recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
22 And Menahem went to rest with his fathers, and his son Pekahiah succeeded him.
23 In the year fifty of King ʽAzariah of Judah, Pekahiah the son of Menahem became king over Israel for a reign of two years at Samaria; 24 and he did what displeased Jehovah, did not turn from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel sin.
25 And his adjutant Pekah the son of Remaliah organized a revolution against him, and assassinated him in Samaria, in the keep of the palace, having with him fifty men of the sons of Gilead, and succeeded him.
26 And the rest of the history of Pekahiah, and all that he did; will be found recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
27 In the year fifty-two of King ʽAzariah of Judah, Pekah the son of Remaliah became king over Israel for a reign of twenty years at Samaria.
28 And he did what displeased Jehovah, did not turn from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel sin.
29 In the times of King Pekah of Israel, King Tiglath-Pileser of Assyria came and took ʽIjon and Abel-Beth-Maʽacah and Janoh and Kedesh and Hasor and Gilead and the Marchland, all the country of Naphtali, and deported them to Assyria.
30 And Hosheaʽ the son of Elah organized a revolution against Pekah the son of Remaliah and assassinated him and succeeded him.
31 And the rest of the history of Pekah, and all that he did, will be found recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
32 In the year two of Pekah the son of Remaliah as king of Israel, Jotham the son of King ʽUzzijah of Judah became king; 33 he was twenty-five years old at his accession to the throne, and he reigned sixteen years at Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Jerusha the daughter of Sadok.
34 And he did what Jehovah approved, just as his father ʽUzzijah had; 35 only the heights were not removed: the people still sacrificed and made burnings on the heights.
He built the upper gate of Jehovah’s house.
36 And as to the rest of the history of Jotham, and all that he did, it is recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Judah.
37 In his days Jehovah began to send upon Judah King Rason of Syria and Pekah the son of Remaliah.
38 And Jotham went to rest with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in his father David’s city, and his son Ahaz succeeded him.
16:1-20
16 In the year seventeen of Pekah the son of Remaliah, Ahaz the son of King Jotham of Judah became king; 2 Ahaz was twenty years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned sixteen years at Jerusalem.
And he did not do what his God Jehovah approved as his father David had, 3 but followed the path of the kings of Israel, and sent his son over through the fire besides, in accordance with the detestable ways of the nations Jehovah dispossessed before the sons of Israel, 4 and sacrificed and made burnings at the heights and on the hills and under every verdant tree.
5 Then King Rason of Syria and King Pekah the son of Remaliah of Israel came up to Jerusalem to attack it, and beleaguered Ahaz but could not attack.
6 (At that time the king of Edom reannexed Elath to Edom and cleared the Judahites out of Elath, and Edomites came into Elath and lived there, and are there to this day.) 7 And Ahaz sent envoys to King Tiglath-Pileser of Assyria with the message “I am your subject and your son; come up and save me out of the hands of the king of Syria and of the king of Israel, who have come out against me”; 8 and Ahaz took the silver and gold that was found in Jehovah’s house and in the palace treasuries and sent it to the king of Assyria as a present.
9 And the king of Assyria listened to him, and came up to Damascus and captured it and deported it to Kir, and put Rason to death.
10 And King Ahaz went to Damascus to meet King Tiglath-Pileser of Assyria, and saw the altar at Damascus; and King Ahaz sent to Priest Urijah the measurements and design of the altar, the complete specifications, 11 and Priest Urijah built the altar: as King Ahaz had sent from Damascus, just so Priest Urijah did, till King Ahaz came from Damascus.
12 And the king came from Damascus, and the king saw the altar, and the king approached the altar and went up it, 13 and burned his burnt-offering and grain-offering and poured his libations, an threw his welfare-sacrifice blood against the altar.
14 And the bronze altar that was before Jehovah he brought on from in front of the house, from between the altar and Jehovah’s house, and put it by the northwest corner of the altar; 15 and King Ahaz gave order to Priest Urijah “On the large altar burn the morning burnt-offering and the evening grain-offering, and the king’s burnt-offering and grain-offering, and the burnt-offerings of all the people and their grain-offerings and libations, and throw against it all burnt-offering blood and sacrifice blood; and the bronze altar shall be for my inspecting,” 16 and Priest Urijah did just as King Ahaz ordered.
17 And the king mutilated the stands and took the borders off them, and the laver; and the sea he took down off the cattle that had been under it and put it on a stone pavement; 18 and the sabbath canopy that they had built in the house, and the king’s outer entrance, he brought round to Jehovah’s house, because of the king of Assyria.
19 And as to the rest of the history of Ahaz, and all that he did, it is recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Judah.
20 And Ahaz went to rest with his fathers, and was buried in David’s City; and his son Hezekiah succeeded him.
17:1-41
17 In the year twelve of King Ahaz of Judah, Hosheaʽ the son of Elah became king over Israel for a reign of nine years at Samaria; 2 and he did what displeased Jehovah, yet not like the kings of Israel that had been before him.
3 Against him King Shalmaneser of Assyria came up, and Hosheaʽ became his subject and paid him tribute.
4 But the king of Assyria detected Hosheaʽ in treason, in that he had sent envoys to King Seve of Egypt, and had not sent up tribute to the king of Assyria as he had annually done; and the king of Assyria arrested him and imprisoned him.
5 And the king of Assyria came up all over the country, and came to Samaria and besieged it three years.
6 In the year nine of Hosheaʽ the king of Assyria took Samaria and deported the Israelites to Assyria, and settled them in Halah and on the Habor, the river of Gozan, in the cities of Media.
7 And because the sons of Israel had sinned against Jehovah, their God that had brought them up out of Egypt, from under the hand of the Pharaoh, the king of Egypt, and had feared other gods 8 and gone by the usages of the nations Jehovah dispossessed before the sons of Israel, and those of the kings of Israel that they had originated; 9 and the sons of Israel depraved themselves with doing against their God Jehovah things that were not right, and built themselves heights in all their cities, from watchmen’s tower to fortified city, 10 and set up obelisks and asherahs for themselves on every high hill and under every verdant tree, 11 and made burnings there, like the nations Jehovah had removed before them, 12 and established religious prostitutes of both sexes, provoking Jehovah, and worshiped fetishes, the thing of which Jehovah had said to them “You shall not do this”; 13 and Jehovah warned Israel by every prophet and every seer, saying “Turn back from your evil courses and keep my commandments, my usages, in conformity with all the instructions which I prescribed to your fathers and which I sent to you by my servants the prophets”; 14 but they did not listen, but stiffened their necks as had their fathers who had not believed in their God Jehovah, 15 and rejected his usages and his covenant which he had entered into with their fathers, and his lessons which he had inculcated upon them, and ran into superstitions and became slaves to them, and followed the nations around them, whom Jehovah had commanded them not to do like, 16 and left the commandments of their God Jehovah and made themselves statues, two calves, and made an asherah and did reverence to all the legions of the sky and worshiped the Baal; 17 and they sent their children over through the fire, and practiced soothsaying, and believed in signs, and sold themselves to do what displeased Jehovah, provoking him,
18 Jehovah became very angry with Israel, and removed it from before his face: none at all were left but the tribe of Judah alone.
19 Neither did Judah keep the commandments of their God Jehovah, but went by the usages of the Israelites that they had originated; 20 and Jehovah condemned all the stock of Israel, and ground them down and gave them into the hands of pillagers, till he threw them aside; 21 because Jehovah had torn Israel off from the house of David and they had made Jeroboam the son of Nebat king, and Jeroboam had deluded Israel away from following Jehovah and had made them commit a great sin, 22 and the sons of Israel had walked in Jeroboam’s sin which he had originated and had not turned from it, 23 till Jehovah removed Israel from before his face, as he had threatened by all his servants the prophets, and deported Israel off their soil to Assyria to remain to this day.
24 And the king of Assyria brought men from Babylon and Cuthah and ʽAvvah and Hamath and Sepharvaim and settled them in the cities of Samaria in place of the sons of Israel, and they took possession of Samaria and lived in its cities.
25 And in the beginning of their settlement they did not fear Jehovah, and he sent the lions upon them, and they went to killing among them; 26 and the king of Assyria was told “The nations you deported and settled in the cities of Samaria do not know the observances for the god of the country, and he has sent the lions upon them, and here they are killing them off, as they do not know the observances for the god of the country.” 27 And the king of Assyria gave orders “Send there one of the priests you deported from there, to go and live there and instruct them in the observances for the god of the country”; 28 and one of the priests they had deported from Samaria came and settled at Bethel and went to instructing them how they should fear Jehovah.
29 And they went to making their various national gods and installing them in the height-houses the Samarians had made, each nation in their cities where they were living; 30 and the men of Babylon made Succoth-Benoth, and the men of Cuth made Nergal, and the men of Hamath made Ashima, 31 and the ʽAvvites made Nibhaz and Tartak, and the Sepharvites burned their children in the fire to Adrammelec and ʽAnammelec the gods of Sepharvaim; 32 and they went to fearing Jehovah, and made out of the common people height-priests for themselves, who functioned for them in the height-houses.
33 They feared Jehovah, and worshiped their gods in accordance with the observances of the nations they had been deported from.
34 To this day they act as was their first fashion.
They do not fear Jehovah and do not act in accordance with his usages and laws and with the instructions and commandments which Jehovah had enjoined upon the sons of Jacob, on whom he had bestowed the name Israel, 35 and Jehovah had made a covenant with them and given them orders, “You shall not fear other gods nor do them reverence nor sacrifice to them; 36 but Jehovah, who brought you up out of Egypt with great strength and outstretched arm, him you shall fear and to him you shall do reverence and to him you shall sacrifice, 37 and the usages and laws and instructions and commandments which he has written down for you you shall at all times be heedful to do, and not fear other gods.
38 And the covenant I have made with you you shall not forget, nor fear other gods; 39 but your God Jehovah you shall fear, and he will deliver you out of the hands of your enemies.” 40 But they have not listened, but are acting as was their first fashion.
41 And these nations went to fearing Jehovah while worshiping their carvings; their sons and grandsons too are to this day doing as their fathers did.
18:1-37
18 And in the year three of Hosheaʽ the son of Elah as king of Israel, Hezekiah the son of King Ahaz of Judah became king; 2 he was twenty-five years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned twenty-nine years at Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Abi the daughter of Zecariah.
3 And he did what Jehovah approved, just as his father David had.
4 It was he who cleared out the heights and broke up the obelisks and cut down the asherah, and pounded up the bronze snake that Moses made, because down to those days the sons of Israel had been making burnings to it; and he called it Nehushtan.
5 He trusted in Israel’s God Jehovah, and there was not his like after him among the kings of Judah, and those who had gone before him.
6 And he stood by Jehovah, did not turn aside from following him, and kept his commandments which Jehovah had commanded Moses.
7 And Jehovah was with him; he did well in everything he undertook, and broke his allegiance to the king of Assyria and became independent of him.
8 He made havoc of the Philistines down to Ghaza and its territories, from watchmen’s tower to fortified city.
9 And in the year four of King Hezekiah, that being the year seven of Hosheaʽ the son of Elah as king of Israel, King Shalmaneser of Assyria came up against Samaria and besieged it, 10 and took it at the end of three years: in the year six of Hezekiah, that being the year nine of King Hosheaʽ of Israel, Samaria was taken.
11 And the king of Assyria deported the Israelites to Assyria, and planted them in Halah and on the Habor, the river of Gozan, and in the cities of Media, 12 for their not having obeyed their God Jehovah and having violated his covenant, all that Jehovah’s servant Moses commanded them, and not having listened nor done the things required of them.
13 And in the year fourteen of King Hezekiah King Sennacherib of Assyria came up against all the fortified cities in Judah and captured them.
14 And King Hezekiah of Judah sent word to the king of Assyria at Lakish “I have done wrong; break off your attack, I will accept the penalty you may impose on me.”
And the king of Assyria sentenced Hezekiah to a fine of three hundred hundredweight of silver and thirty of gold; 15 and Hezekiah gave him all the silver that could be found in Jehovah’s house and in the palace treasuries.
16 It was at that time that Hezekiah mutilated the doors of Jehovah’s nave, and the jambs which King Hezekiah of Judah had gilded, and gave them to the king of Assyria.
17 And the king of Assyria sent the Rabshakeh from Lakish to King Hezekiah at Jerusalem with a formidable force; and he came up and stood on the aqueduct of the upper reservoir, the one that is on the highway to the Fuller’s Field, 18 and called for the king; and Eljakim the son of Hilkijah, the steward of the palace, and Shebna, the secretary for documents, and Joah the son of Asaph, the king’s private secretary, went out to him.
19 And the Rabshakeh said to them “Say to Hezekiah ‘Says the Great King, the king of Assyria, What confidence is this that you are feeling? 20 you think policy and strength for war is just a matter of talk.
Now in whom are you trusting, that you have broken your allegiance to me? 21 trusting to this cracked bamboo cane Egypt, which, when a man leans his weight on it, will run into his hand and transfix it
that is what the Pharaoh, the king of Egypt, is like for everybody who trusts to him.
22 And as for your saying to me “We are trusting on our God Jehovah,” is not he the one whose heights and altars Hezekiah has made away with, and has told Judah and Jerusalem “You shall do reverence before this altar”? 23 Now make a bet with my sovereign the king of Assyria, that I am to give you two thousand ponies if you can furnish riders for them; 24 and how are you to repel one of my sovereign’s minor officers? and you are trusting to Egypt for chariotry and cavalry.
25 And then, have I come up against this place independently of Jehovah to ravage it?
Jehovah said to me “Go up against this country and ravage it.”’”
26 And Eljakim and Shebna and Joah said to the Rabshakeh “Speak to your servants in Aramaic, for we understand it: do not speak with us in Judaic in the hearing of the people on the wall.” 27 But the Rabshakeh said to them “Was it to your sovereign and you that my sovereign sent me to tell these things? was it not to the men that are sitting on the wall to eat their own dung and drink their own urine with you?” 28 And the Rabshakeh stood and called out in a loud voice in Judaic “Listen to the word of the Great King, the king of Assyria! 29 Says the king, Do not let Hezekiah delude you, because he will not be able to deliver you.
30 Do not let Hezekiah get you to trusting on Jehovah, with his ‘Jehovah will deliver us, and this city shall not be given into the hands of the king of Assyria.’ 31 Do not listen to Hezekiah; for the king of Assyria says, Have an understanding with me and come out to me, and eat from your home vines and fig-trees and drink the water of your home cisterns 32 till I come and take you to a country like your own,
a country of grain and grape-juice, of bread and vineyards, of oil-olives and honey,
and live and do not die; and do not listen to Hezekiah when he tries to influence you with his ‘Jehovah will deliver us.’ 33 Have the gods of the different nations delivered their countries out of the hands of the king of Assyria?
Where are the gods of Hamath and Arpad? 34 where are the gods of Sepharvaim? where are the gods of Samaria, did they deliver Samaria out of my hands? 35 Who are there among all the gods of the different countries that have delivered their countries out of my hands, that Jehovah should deliver Jerusalem out of my hands?”
36 But they kept still and made no answer to him; for the king’s order was “Do not answer him.”
37 And Eljakim the son of Hilkijah, the steward of the palace, and Shebna, the secretary for documents, and Joah the son of Asaph, the king’s private secretary, came to Hezekiah with their clothes torn, and told him the Rabshakeh’s words.
19:1-37
19 And when King Hezekiah heard them he tore his clothes and put a sackcloth about him and went into Jehovah’s house, 2 and sent Eljakim the steward of the palace and Shebna the secretary for documents and the elders of the priests, with sackcloths about them, to the prophet Isaiah the son of Amos; 3 and they said to him “Says Hezekiah, This is a day of distress and castigation and contempt, because children have come to the mouth of the womb and we have not strength to complete a birth.
4 Perhaps your God Jehovah will listen to the Rabshakeh’s words with which his sovereign the king of Assyria has sent him to taunt a living God, and will chastise the words that your God Jehovah hears; and you shall put up a prayer for the remnant that still exists.”
5 And King Hezekiah’s officers came to Isaiah; 6 and Isaiah said to them “You shall say to your sovereign ‘Says Jehovah, Do not be afraid of the words you have heard, in which the king of Assyria’s servants have blasphemed me; 7 I am going to put a spirit in him, and he shall hear a report and go back to his own country, and I will have him fall by the sword in his own country.’”
8 And Rabshakeh went back, and found the king of Assyria attacking Libnah; for he had heard that he had moved away from Lakish.
9 And he heard say about King Tirhakah of Nubia “He has come out to fight you”; and, hearing it, he again sent envoys to Hezekiah with the message 10 “You shall say to King Hezekiah of Judah ‘Do not let your God in whom you trust delude you with the thought “Jerusalem shall not be given into the hands of the king of Assyria.” 11 You have heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all the countries, destroying them without quarter; and are you to be delivered? 12 Did the gods of the nations my fathers ravaged deliver them, Gozan and Haran and Reseph and the Bene-ʽEden at Telassar? 13 where is the king of Hamath, where the king of Arpad and the king of Sepharvaim city, of Henaʽ and ʽIvvah?’” 14 And Hezekiah received the letter from the envoys’ hands and read it; and he went up to Jehovah’s house.
And Hezekiah spread it out before Jehovah; 15 and Hezekiah prayed before Jehovah, “Jehovah, God of Israel, sitter upon the cherubs, you are God alone for all the kingdoms of the earth: it was you who made the heavens and the earth.
16 Bend down your ear, Jehovah, and listen; open your eyes, Jehovah, and see; and hear Sennacherib’s words which he has sent, taunting a living God.
17 The kings of Assyria have indeed, Jehovah, laid waste the nations and their countries, 18 and put their gods in the fire, because they are not gods but work of human hands, wood and stone, and destroyed them; 19 but now, Jehovah our God, save us out of his hands and let all the kingdoms on earth know that you, Jehovah, alone are God.”
20 And Isaiah the son of Amos sent word to Hezekiah “Says Israel’s God Jehovah, Whereas you have prayed to me about King Sennacherib of Assyria, 21 this is the word Jehovah has spoken against him: Sion’s maiden daughter despises and derides you; Jerusalem’s daughter shakes her head after you.
22 Whom have you taunted and blasphemed, and against whom have you clamored at the top of your voice and lifted your eyes high? against the Holy One of Israel.
23 By your servants you have taunted the Lord, and have said ‘With chariots, my chariots, I have gone up to the tops of the mountains, the recesses of Lebanon, and have cut down the tallest of its cedars, the choicest of its cypresses, and have come to its final lodgment, its wildwood of garden-land.
24 I have dug and drunk unknown waters, have dried off with my marching feet all the streams of Egypt’s Nile.’ 25 Do you hear? far back I acted, shaped it from days of old, have now brought it in, and you have been for crashing down fortified cities into ruined heaps; 26 and their puny-handed inhabitants were dismayed and abashed, became field herbage and greensward, roof-grass blighted before the east wind.
27 Your standing up and sitting down, your going out and coming in I know, and your raging against me.
28 Since your raging against me and your hubbub have come up to my ears, I will put my hook in your nose and my bridle between your lips, and take you back the way you came.
29 “And this is the token you are to have, eating the self-sown crop this year and the crop run wild next year; and in the third year sow and reap, and set out vineyards and eat their fruit.
30 And the remaining survivors of the house of Judah shall more and more take root downward and bear fruit upward; 31 for out of Jerusalem shall a remnant come forth, and survivors out of Mount Sion; the championship of Jehovah of Armies will do this.
32 “So Jehovah says of the king of Assyria, He shall not come to this city nor shoot an arrow there nor push a shield up to it nor throw up a ramp against it: 33 by the road he came on he shall go back, and not come to this city, quoth Jehovah.
34 And I will shield this city, saving it on my own account and on my servant David’s.”
35 And that night Jehovah’s angel went out and killed a hundred and eighty-five thousand men in the Assyrian camp: the first thing in the morning they were all found dead corpses.
36 And King Sennacherib of Assyria broke camp and went back and stayed at Nineveh; 37 and as he was doing reverence in the house of his god Nisroc his sons Adrammelec and Sareser stabbed him; and they made their escape to Armenia, and his son Esar-Haddon succeeded him.
20:1-21
20 In those days Hezekiah fell sick and was at the point of death, and the prophet Isaiah the son of Amos came to him and said to him “Says Jehovah, Make your will, because you are a dead man and are not to recover.” 2 And he turned his face to the wall and prayed to Jehovah 3 “Ah, Jehovah, remember how I have walked before you in wholehearted loyalty and done what pleased you”
and Hezekiah wept copiously.
4 And the prophet Isaiah had not got out to the middle court when Jehovah’s word came to him 5 “Go back and say to Hezekiah, the warden of my people, ‘Says Jehovah, your father David’s God, I have heard your prayer, I have seen your tears: I am healing you: day after tomorrow you shall go up to Jehovah’s house; 6 and I will add to your days fifteen years, and will deliver you and this city out of the hands of the king of Assyria, and will shield this city for my own sake and for my servant David’s.’” 7 And Isaiah said “Take a cake of figs”; and they took it and laid it over the abscess, and he recovered.
8 And Hezekiah said to Isaiah “What is the token that Jehovah will heal me and I shall go up to Jehovah’s house day after tomorrow?” 9 And Isaiah said “This is the token you are to have from Jehovah that Jehovah will do the thing he said he would: shall the shadow move on ten steps or back ten steps?” 10 And Hezekiah said “It is too easy for the shadow to slant down ten steps; no, let the shadow recede ten steps backward.” 11 And the prophet Isaiah called out to Jehovah, and he sent the shadow back on the steps, ten steps backward.
12 At that time Merodac Baladan the son of Baladan, the king of Babylon, sent letters and a present to Hezekiah, because he had heard that Hezekiah had been sick.
13 And Hezekiah was glad to see them, and showed them all his treasury, the silver and the gold and the spices and the fine oil, and his arsenal, and everything that was to be found in his hoards: there was not a thing that Hezekiah did not show them, in his palace and in all his dominions.
14 And the prophet Isaiah came to King Hezekiah and said to him “What did these men say, and where do they come to you from?” and Hezekiah said “They have come from a distant country, Babylon.” 15 And he said “What did they see in your palace?” and Hezekiah said “They saw everything that there was in my palace: there was not a thing that I did not show them in my hoards.” 16 And Isaiah said to Hezekiah “Listen to Jehovah’s word: 17 there are days coming when everything there is in your palace, and that your fathers have hoarded down to this day, will be carried away to Babylon: there will not be a thing left, says Jehovah.
18 And sons of yours, out of your body, of your begetting, will be taken and become eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.” 19 And Hezekiah said to Isaiah “Jehovah’s word that you speak is good”; and he said “It is, is it not, if there will be peace and fairness in my time?”
20 And as to the rest of the history of Hezekiah, and all his exploits, and how he made the reservoir and the aqueduct and brought the water into the city, they are recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Judah.
21 And Hezekiah went to rest with his fathers, and his son Manasseh succeeded him.
21:1-26
21 Manasseh was twelve years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned fifty-five years at Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Hephsibah.
2 And he did what displeased Jehovah, like the detestable ways of the nations Jehovah dispossessed before the sons of Israel; 3 and he rebuilt the heights his father Hezekiah had destroyed, and set up altars to the Baal, as King Ahab of Israel had, and did reverence to all the legions of the sky and worshiped them, 4 and built altars in the house of Jehovah, who had said “In Jerusalem I will set my name”; 5 and he built altars to all the legions of the sky in both the courts of Jehovah’s house, 6 and sent his son over through the fire, and practiced fortune-telling and believed in signs, and employed spirit-mediums of different kinds: he did what displeased Jehovah on a great scale, provoking him.
7 And he set the statue of the asherah in the house of which Jehovah had said to David and his son Solomon “In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, I will set my name forever, 8 and I will no more set Israel’s feet roving off the soil I gave to their fathers, if only they take care to do just as I commanded them, under all the instructions my servant Moses prescribed to them.” 9 And Manasseh demoralized them into misdoing more than had the nations Jehovah had rooted out before the sons of Israel.
10 And Jehovah said by his servants the prophets 11 “Since King Manasseh of Judah has done these detestable things, doing worse than everything the Amorites before him had done, and has brought Judah too into sin by his fetishes, 12 therefore Israel’s God Jehovah says ‘Here I am bringing on Jerusalem and Judah such an evil that when anybody hears of it both his ears will buzz; 13 and I will stretch over Jerusalem the measuring-line of Samaria and hold up over it the scales of the house of Ahab, and wipe Jerusalem as one wipes a dish, wipe and turn upside down, 14 and abandon the remnant of my estate and give them into the hands of their enemies, and they shall be exposed to the pillaging and plundering of all their enemies, 15 since they have been doing what displeased me and provoking me from the day I brought their fathers out of Egypt to this day.”
16 And Manasseh shed innocent blood too in great quantities, till he had filled Jerusalem with it from portal to portal, besides his sin which he caused Judah to commit in doing what displeased Jehovah.
17 And as to the rest of the history of Manasseh, and all that he did, and his sin that he committed, it is recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Judah.
18 And Manasseh went to rest with his fathers, and was buried in the garden of his palace, ʽUzza’s garden; and his son Amon succeeded him.
19 Amon was twenty-two years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned two years at Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Meshullemeth the daughter of Harus, from Jotbah.
20 And he did what displeased Jehovah, as his father Manasseh had, 21 and went the whole length of the path his father had walked in, and worshiped the fetishes his father had worshiped, and did reverence to them, 22 and left his fathers’ God Jehovah and did not walk in Jehovah’s way.
23 And Amon’s officers organized a revolution against him and took the king’s life in his palace; 24 but the people killed all who had taken part in the conspiracy against King Amon, and the people installed his son Josiah as his successor.
25 And as to the rest of the history of Amon, what he did, it is recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Judah.
26 And they buried him in his grave in ʽUzza’s garden, and his son Josiah succeeded him.
22:1-20
22 Josiah was eight years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned thirty-one years at Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Jedidah the daughter of ʽAdajah, from Boskath.
2 And he did what Jehovah approved, and went the whole length of the path of his father David, and did not turn off to right or to left.
3 And in the year eighteen of King Josiah the king sent Shaphan the son of Asaliah the son of Meshullam, the secretary for documents, to Jehovah’s house with the order 4 “Go up to High Priest Hilkijah and have him sum up the money that has been brought into Jehovah’s house, that the threshold-keepers have collected from the people, 5 and put it into the hands of the contractors employed on Jehovah’s house, to be given to the workmen on Jehovah’s house for repairing the damages of the house, 6 to the carpenters and builders and masons, and for buying wood and dressed stone to repair the house.
7 Only let no accounts of the money put into their hands be demanded from them, because they are working on honor.”
8 And High Priest Hilkijah said to Secretary Shaphan “I have found the Code in Jehovah’s house”; and Hilkijah gave the book to Shaphan, and he read it.
9 And he went in to the king and made his report to him, “Your officers have poured out the money that was found in the house, and have put it into the hands of the contractors employed on Jehovah’s house.” 10 And Secretary Shaphan told the king “Priest Hilkijah has given me a book”; and Shaphan read it before the king; 11 and when the king heard the words of the Code he tore his clothes.
12 And the king gave Priest Hilkijah and Ahikam the son of Shaphan and ʽAcbor the son of Micajah and Secretary Shaphan and King’s Sergeant ʽAsajah the order 13 “Go inquire of Jehovah on my behalf and on behalf of the people and on behalf of what is left of Israel and Judah about the words of this book that has been found, because it is a great ire of Jehovah’s that is kindled against us for our fathers’ not having listened to the words of this book and acted in accordance with all that is written in it.” 14 And Priest Hilkijah and Ahikam and ʽAcbor and Shaphan and ʽAsajah went to the prophetess Huldah the wife of Shallum the son of Tikvah the son of Harhas the keeper of the wardrobe (she lived in Jerusalem, in the second quarter), and spoke to her.
15 And she said to them “Says Israel’s God Jehovah, Say to the man who sent you to me 16 ‘Says Jehovah, I am bringing mischief upon this place and its inhabitants, all the things that are spoken of in the book the king of Judah has read.
17 In return for their having left me and made burnings to other gods, provoking me with their manufactures, my ire is kindled against this people and will not die down.’ 18 And to the king of Judah who sent you to inquire of Jehovah you shall say ‘Says Israel’s God Jehovah, Because you gave heed to the words you heard, 19 since your heart quailed, and you humbled yourself before me when you heard what I had denounced against this place and its inhabitants, that it should be a horror and a curse, and you tore your clothes and wept before me, I on my part have heard it, quoth Jehovah; 20 so I am taking you home to your fathers, and you shall be taken home to your grave in peace, and your eyes shall not look upon all the mischief I am bringing on this place.’”
And they reported it to the king.
23:1-37
23 And the king sent and brought together to him all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem; 2 and the king went up to Jehovah’s house, and all the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem with him, and the priests and the prophets and all the people from smallest to greatest, and he read to them all the words of the book of the covenant that had been found in Jehovah’s house.
3 And the king stood by the pillar and ratified the covenant before Jehovah, to follow Jehovah and keep his commandments and his lessons and his usages unreservedly and heartily, making good the provisions of this covenant which are recorded in this book; and all the people stood as participants in the covenant.
4 And the king ordered Hilkijah and the second priest and the threshold-keepers to take out of Jehovah’s temple all the things that had been used for the Baal and the asherah and all the legions of the sky, and he burned them outside Jerusalem on the terraces of Kidron and carried their dust away to Bethel; 5 and he made an end of the komers whom the kings of Judah had installed and who made burnings on the heights in the cities of Judah and the environs of Jerusalem, and of the burners to the Baal and the sun and the moon and the mazzaloth and all the legions of the sky, 6 and took the asherah from Jehovah’s house outside Jerusalem to Kidron Arroyo and burned it in Kidron Arroyo and reduced it to dust and threw the dust of it on the public burying-ground; 7 and he pulled down the kiosk for religious prostitution that there was in Jehovah’s house, where the women wove cases for the asherah.
8 And he brought in all the priests from the cities of Judah, and desecrated the heights where the priests had made burnings, from Gebaʽ to Beer-Shebaʽ, and pulled down the Gate Heights at the gate of Joshuaʽ the captain of the city, on the left of a man entering the city gate.
9 Only the height-priests did not go up Jehovah’s altar at Jerusalem; but they ate matzoth among their brothers.
10 And he desecrated the fire-pit that was in Ben-Hinnom’s Valley for a man to send his child over through the fire to Melec, 11 and made an end of the ponies the kings of Judah had given to the sun, at the entrance of Jehovah’s house, putting them in the vestry of Eunuch Nathan-Melec, in the addition; and the chariot of the sun he burned up.
12 And the altars on the roof, Ahaz’s upper story, which the kings of Judah had made, and the altars Manasseh had made in the two courts of Jehovah’s house, the king pulled down; and he smashed them up on the spot, and threw the dust of them into Kidron Arroyo.
13 And the heights along to the east of Jerusalem, south of the Mount of Olives, which King Solomon of Israel had built to ʽAshtart the goddess of the Phenicians and to Kemosh the god of Moab and to Melec the god of the Bene-ʽAmmon, the king desecrated, 14 and broke up the obelisks and cut down the asherahs and filled their places full of human bones.
15 And the altar at Bethel too, the height Jeroboam the son of Nebat had made, he who made Israel sin, that altar too and the height the king pulled down, and broke up its stones, pounding them to dust, and burned its asherah.
16 And Josiah turned and saw the graves there on the mountainside, and sent and took the bones out of the graves and burned them on the altar and defiled it, in accordance with Jehovah’s prediction which the man of God had proclaimed when Jeroboam was standing by the altar at the feast; and he turned and raised his eyes toward the grave of the man of God who had proclaimed these things, and said 17 “What is yonder marker that I see?” and the men of the city said to him “The grave is the grave of the man of God who came out of Judah and proclaimed these things that you have done against the altar.” 18 And he said “Leave it alone; let nobody disturb his bones”; and they left his bones in security, with the bones of the prophet that came from Samaria.
19 And Josiah also cleared away all the height-houses in the cities of Samaria, which the kings of Israel had made by way of provocation, and did to them just such things as he had at Bethel.
20 And he killed on the altars like sacrificed animals all the height-priests there, and burned human bones on them, and came back to Jerusalem.
21 And the king gave orders to all the people “Celebrate a passover to your God Jehovah in accordance with what is written in this book of the code”; 22 for the like of that passover had not been celebrated since the time of the judges who had judged Israel, and all the time of the kings of Israel and of Judah, 23 but in the year eighteen of King Josiah this passover was celebrated in Jehovah’s honor at Jerusalem.
24 And the spirit-mediums of different kinds too, and the teraphim and the fetishes, and all the disgustments that were to be seen in the country of Judah and in Jerusalem, Josiah routed out, in order to put in effect the words of the code, written in the book that Priest Hilkijah had found in Jehovah’s house.
25 And there had not been the like of him before him, a king who went back to Jehovah with all his heart and with all his soul and with all his being, in full accordance with the code of Moses, nor did there arise another the like of him after him.
26 Yet Jehovah did not turn back from his great anger which he had conceived against Judah for all the provocations Manasseh had given him.
27 And Jehovah thought “I will remove Judah too from before my face, as I did Israel, and reject this city that I chose, Jerusalem, and the house of which I said ‘My name shall be there.’”
28 And as to the rest of the history of Josiah, and all that he did, it is recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Judah.
29 In his time King Pharaoh Necoh of Egypt went up the river Euphrates against the king of Assyria, and King Josiah went to meet him, and he killed him at Megiddo when he saw him.
30 And his officers set him in his chariot dead and took him away from Megiddo, and brought him to Jerusalem and buried him in his own grave; and the populace took Josiah’s son Jehoahaz and anointed him, and installed him as his father’s successor.
31 Jehoahaz was twenty-three years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned three months at Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah, from Libnah.
32 And he did what displeased Jehovah, just as his fathers had.
33 And Pharaoh Necoh put, him under arrest at Riblah in the country of Hamath, and gave the country a fine of a hundred hundredweight of silver and a hundredweight of gold; 34 and Pharaoh Necoh installed Josiah’s son Eljakim as successor to his father Josiah, and renamed him Jehojakim.
And Jehoahaz he took and brought to Egypt, and he died there; 35 and the silver and the gold Jehojakim gave to the Pharaoh, but he assessed the country to give the silver, by the Pharaoh’s directions
each man in accordance with his assessment exacted the silver and gold to give to Pharaoh Necoh.
36 Jehojakim was twenty-five years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned eleven years at Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Zebidah the daughter of Pedajah, from Rumah.
37 And he did what displeased Jehovah, just as his fathers had.
24:1-20
24 In his time King Nebucadnessar of Babylon came up, and Jehojakim became his subject for three years, but went back and threw off his allegiance to him.
2 And Jehovah sent upon him the raiders of the Chaldeans and of Syria and of Moab and of the Bene-ʽAmmon, in accordance with Jehovah’s prediction which he had made by his servants the prophets.
3 It was all a matter of Jehovah’s anger at Judah, to remove it from before his face for Manasseh’s sins, appropriately to everything he had done, 4 including the innocent blood he had shed and filled Jerusalem full of innocent blood, and Jehovah would not forgive.
5 And as to the rest of the history of Jehojakim, and all that he did, they are recorded in the chronicles of the kings of Judah.
6 And Jehojakim went to rest with his fathers, and his son Jehojakin succeeded him.
7 And the king of Egypt never again came out of his country; for the king of Babylon had taken everything that had belonged to the king of Egypt from Egypt Arroyo to the river Euphrates.
8 Jehojakin was eighteen years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned three months at Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Nehushta the daughter of Elnathan, from Jerusalem.
9 And he did what displeased Jehovah, just as his father had.
10 At that time King Nebucadnessar of Babylon came up to Jerusalem, and the city was besieged.
11 And King Nebucadnessar of Babylon came against the city while his officers were besieging it, 12 and King Jehojakin of Judah went out to the king of Babylon, he and his mother and his officials, and his generals and his eunuchs, and the king of Babylon took him, in the year eight of his reign.
13 And he brought out from there all the treasures of Jehovah’s house and of the palace, and mutilated all the golden things that King Solomon of Israel had made in Jehovah’s temple, as Jehovah had foretold.
14 And he deported all Jerusalem, and all the generals, and all the leading men, a deportation of ten thousand, and all the carpenters and smiths; there was nobody left but the proletariat; 15 and he deported Jehojakin to Babylon, and the queen-mother and the king’s wives and his eunuchs, and the notables of the country, he sent along from Jerusalem to Babylon as a deportation; 16 and all the leading men, seven thousand in number, and the carpenters and smiths, one thousand, the whole number fighting men, the king of Babylon brought to Babylon as a deportation.
17 And the king of Babylon installed his uncle Mattaniah as his successor, and renamed him Sidkijah.
18 Sidkijah was twenty-one years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned eleven years at Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah, from Libnah.
19 And he did what displeased Jehovah just as Jehojakim had, 20 because it was a matter of Jehovah’s anger at Jerusalem and Judah, till he threw them away from before his face.
25:1-30
25 And Sidkijah broke his allegiance to the king of Babylon.
And in the year nine of his reign, in the tenth month, on the tenth of the month, King Nebucadnessar of Babylon came against Jerusalem, he and all his forces, and beleaguered it and built a wall of investment around it; 2 and the city was besieged till the year eleven of King Sidkijah in the fourth month, the ninth of the month.
3 And hunger was pressing hard in the city, and there was no bread for the populace; 4 and the city was breached.
And the king and all the men of war went out in the night by way of the gate between the two walls along the king’s garden, the city being beset all round by the Chaldeans, and went in the direction of the Rift Valley.
5 And the Chaldean forces pursued the king and overtook him on the flats at Jericho, all his forces being scattered away from him, 6 and they captured the king and took him up to Riblah to the king of Babylon, and he held a court and tried him.
7 And he cut the throats of Sidkijah’s sons before his eyes, and put out Sidkijah’s eyes, and put him in fetters and brought him to Babylon.
8 And in the fifth month, on the seventh of the month, it being the year nineteen of King Nebucadnessar of Babylon, Chief Guardsman Nebuzaradan, the king of Babylon’s officer, came to Jerusalem 9 and burned down Jehovah’s house and the royal palace and all the houses in Jerusalem; 10 and all the Chaldean forces that the Chief Guardsman had with him pulled down the walls of Jerusalem all around.
11 And the rest of the people, those who were left of the people in the city, and the deserters who had deserted to the king of Babylon, and the rest of the craftsmen, Chief Guardsman Nebuzaradan deported; 12 but some of the proletariat the Chief Guardsman left for vineyardists and farmers.
13 And the bronze pillars at Jehovah’s house, and the stands and the bronze sea in Jehovah’s house, the Chaldeans broke up, and carried the bronze of them away to Babylon; 14 and they took the pots and shovels and snuffers and pans, and all the bronze articles with which the priests officiated.
15 And the firepans and the bowls, gold what was gold and silver what was silver, the Chief Guardsman took.
16 And the pillars two, and the sea one, and the stands ten, which Solomon had made for Jehovah’s house
there was no weighing the bronze of all these articles. 17 Twenty-seven feet was the height of one pillar, and it had on it a bronze capital, the height of the capital being seven and a half feet, and on the capital, surrounding it, a network and pomegranates, all bronze; and the second pillar had the like on the network.
18 And the Chief Guardsman took High Priest Seraiah and Second Priest Sephaniah and the three threshold-keepers, 19 and out of the city he took a eunuch who had had the oversight of the fighting men, and five of such men having the right of seeing the king’s face as were to be found in the city, and the general’s secretary who had had the summoning of the militia, and sixty of the civilians who were found in the city; 20 Chief Guardsman Nebuzaradan took them and brought them to Riblah to the king of Babylon, 21 and the king of Babylon struck them dead at Riblah, in the country of Hamath; and Judah was deported off its soil.
22 And as for the people left in the country of Judah, those whom King Nebucadnessar of Babylon had left, he put Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan in charge of them; 23 and all the captains of partisan troops, they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had put Gedaliah in charge, and they came to Mispah to Gedaliah
Ishmaʽel the son of Nethaniah and Johanan the son of Kareah and Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth the Netophathite and Jaazaniah the Ben-Maacathite, they and their men
24 and Gedaliah swore to his good faith toward them and their men, and said to them “Do not be afraid of the Chaldeans’ soldiery; live in the country and be subject to the king of Babylon and be well off.” 25 But in the seventh month Ishmaʽel the son of Nethaniah the son of Elishamaʽ, of the royal blood, came and assassinated Gedaliah and the Jews and Chaldeans he had with him at Mispah.
26 And all the people, small and great, and the partisan captains, went off into Egypt because they were afraid of the Chaldeans.
27 And in the thirty-seventh year of the deportation of King Jehojakin of Judah, in the twelfth month, on the twenty-seventh of the month, King Evil-Merodac of Babylon, in the year of his accession to the throne, released King Jehojakin of Judah from jail 28 and had a friendly conversation with him, and put his throne above the thrones of the kings he had with him at Babylon, 29 and changed his jail clothes, and he ate before him regularly as long as he lived.
30 And his allowance was a regular one given him daily out of the royal supplies as long as he lived.
1 Chronicles
1:1-54
1 Adam; Sheth; Enosh; 2 Kenan; Mahalelel; Jered; 3 Enoc; Methushelah; Lemec; 4 Noah; Shem, Ham, and Jepheth.
5 Jepheth’s sons were Gomer and Magog and Media and Greece and Tubal and Moshc and Tyrrhenia; 6 and Gomer’s were Ashkenaz and Riphath and Togarmah; 7 and Greece’s were Sicily and Spain, Cyprus and Rhodes.
8 Ham’s sons were Nubia and Egypt, Put and Canaan; 9 and Nubia’s were Seba and Havilah and Sabta and Raghma and Sabteca; and Raghmah’s were Sheba and Dedan.
10 And Nubia had a son Nimrod: he was the first to become a potentate on earth.
11 And Egypt had sons, the Ludites and the ʽAnamites and the Lehabites and the Naphtuhites 12 and the Pathrusites and the Casluhites (where the Philistines came from) and the Caphtorites.
13 And Canaan had sons, Sidon his eldest and Heth, 14 and the Jebusites and the Amorites and the Girgashites 15 and the Hivvites and the ʽArkites and the Sinites 16 and the Arvadites and the Semarites and the Hamathites.
17 Shem’s sons were ʽElam and Assyria and Arpacshad and Lud and Syria; and Syria’s were ʽUs and Hul and Gether and Mash.
18 And Arpacshad had a son Shelah; and Shelah had a son ʽEber.
19 And ʽEber had two sons born to him; the one’s name was Peleg, because in his time the earth was divided, and his brother’s name was Joktan.
20 And Joktan had sons, Almodad and Sheleph and Hadramaut and Jerah 21 and Hadoram and Uzal and Diklah 22 and ʽEbal and Abimael and Sheba 23 and Ophir and Havilah and Jobab: all these were Joktan’s sons.
24 Shem; Arpacshad; Shelah; 25 ʽEber; Peleg; Reghu; 26 Serug; Nahor; Terah; 27 Abram, that is, Abraham.
28 Abraham’s sons were Isaac and Ishmaʽel.
29 These are their lines: Ishmaʽel’s firstborn Nebajoth, and Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam, 30 Mishmaʽ and Dumah, Massa, Hadad and Tema, 31 Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah; these are Ishmaʽel’s sons.
32 And the sons of Abraham’s concubine Keturah: she bore Zimran and Jokshan and Medan and Midian and Ishbak and Shuah; and Jokshan’s sons were Sheba and Dedan; 33 and Midian’s sons were Ghephah and ʽEpher and Hanoc and Abidaʽ and Eldaʽah; all these were Keturah’s sons.
34 And Abraham begot Isaac.
Isaac’s sons were ʽEsau and Israel.
35 ʽEsau’s sons were Eliphaz, Reghuel, and Jeghush and Jaʽlam and Korah.
36 Eliphaz’s sons were Teman and Omar, Sephi and Gaʽtam, Kenaz and Timnaʽ and ʽAmalek.
37 Reghuel’s sons were Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah.
38 And Seʽir’s sons were Lotan and Shobal and Sibeon and Ghanah and Dishon and Eser and Dishan.
39 And Lotan’s sons were Hori and Heman; and Lotan’s sister was Timnaʽ.
40 Shobal’s sons were Ghalvan and Manahath and ʽEbal, Shephi and Onam.
And Sibeon’s sons were Aijah and Ghanah.
41 Ghanah’s sons were Dishon.
And Dishon’s sons were Hamram and Eshban and Ithran and Keran.
42 Eser’s sons were Bilhan and Zaʽvan and ʽAkan.
Dishan’s sons were ʽUs and Aran.
43 And these are the kings that reigned in Edom before the sons of Israel had a king reign: Belaʽ the son of Beʽor, whose capital was named Dinhabah; 44 and Belaʽ died, and Jobab the son of Zerah from Bosrah succeeded him; 45 and Jobab died, and Husham from the Temanite country succeeded him; 46 and Husham died, and Hadad the son of Bedad succeeded him, who defeated Midian on the wolds of Moab; his capital was named Ghavith; 47 and Hadad died, and Samlah from Masrekah succeeded him; 48 and Samlah died, and Saul from Rehoboth-hannahar succeeded him; 49 and Saul died, and Baal-Hanan the son of ʽAcbor succeeded him; 50 and Baal-Hanan died, and Hadad succeeded him, whose capital was named Paghi and whose wife was named Mehetabel the daughter of Matred the son of Me-Zahab; 51 and Hadad died.
And the allufs of Edom are the alluf of Timnaʽ, the alluf of ʽAlvah, the alluf of Jetheth, 52 the alluf of Oholibamah, the alluf of Elah, the alluf of Pinon, 53 the alluf of Kenaz, the alluf of Teman, the alluf of Mibsar, 54 the alluf of Magdiel, the alluf of ʽIram; these are the allufs of Edom.
2:1-55
2 These are the sons of Israel: Reuben, Shimeon, Levi and Judah, Issacar and Zebulun, 2 Dan, Joseph and Benjamin, Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.
3 The sons of Judah were ʽEr and Onan and Shelah, three born to him from Bath-Shuaʽ the Canaanite.
And Judah’s eldest son ʽEr displeased Jehovah, and Jehovah caused his death.
4 And his daughter-in-law Tamar bore him Peres and Zerah; in all there were five of Judah’s sons.
5 Peres’s sons were Hesron and Hamul, 6 and Zerah’s were Zimri and Ethan and Heman and Calcol and Dardaʽ, five of them in all; 7 and Carmi’s were ʽAcar who troubled Israel, who was guilty of unfaithfulness in the deodand, 8 and Ethan’s were ʽAzariah.
9 And Hesron’s sons that were born to him, Jerahmeel and Ram and Caleb.
10 And Ram begot ʽAmminadab, and ʽAmminadab begot Nahshon prince of the sons of Judah, 11 and Nahshon begot Salma, and Salma begot Boaz, 12 and Boaz begot ʽObed, and ʽObed begot Jesse, 13 and Jesse begot Eliab his eldest, and Abinadab the second, and Shimea the third, 14 Nethanel the fourth, Raddai the fifth, 15 Osem the sixth, David the seventh; 16 and their sisters were Serujah and Abigail; and Serujah’s sons were Abshai and Joab and ʽAsah-El, three of them; 17 and Abigail bore ʽAmasa, and ʽAmasa’s father was Jether the Ishmaʽelite.
18 And Hesron’s son Caleb begot, by his wife ʽAzubah, Jeriʽoth; and these were her sons: Jesher and Shobab and Ardon.
19 And ʽAzubah died, and Caleb married Ephrath, and she bore him Hur, 20 and Hur begot Uri, and Uri begot Besalel.
21 And afterward Hesron went in to the daughter of Makir the father of Gilead, having married her when he was sixty years old, and she bore him Segub, 22 and Segub begot Jair; and he had twenty-three cities in Gilead, 23 but Geshur and Syria took the Havvoth of Jair from them, Kenath and its dependencies, sixty cities.
All these belonged to the sons of Makir the father of Gilead.
24 And after Hesron’s death Caleb went in to his father Hesron’s widow Ephrath, and she bore him Ashhur the father of Tekoaʽ.
25 And the sons of Hesron’s eldest son Jerahmeel were Ram the eldest and Bunah and Oren and his brother Osem.
26 And Jerahmeel had another wife named ʽAtarah; she was the mother of Onam.
27 And the sons of Jerahmeel’s firstborn Ram were Maʽas and Jamin and ʽEker.
28 And Onam’s sons were Shammai and Jadaʽ; and Shammai’s were Nadab and Abishur.
29 And the name of Abishur’s wife was Abihail; and she bore him Ahban and Molid.
30 And Nadab’s sons were Seled and Appaim; but Seled died childless.
31 And Appaim’s sons were Ishei; and Ishei’s sons were Sheshan; and Sheshan’s sons were Ahlai.
32 And the sons of Shammai’s brother Jada were Jether and Jonathan; but Jether died childless.
33 And Jonathan’s sons were Peleth and Zaza.
These were Jerahmeel’s sons.
34 And Sheshan did not have sons, but daughters.
And Sheshan had an Egyptian slave named Jarhaʽ; 35 and Sheshan married his daughter to his slave Jarhaʽ, and she bore him ʽAttai, 36 and ʽAttai begot Nathan, and Nathan begot Zabad, 37 and Zabad begot Ephlal, and Ephlal begot ʽObed, 38 and ʽObed begot Jehu, and Jehu begot ʽAzariah, 39 and ʽAzariah begot Heles, and Heles begot Eleasah, 40 and Eleasah begot Sismai, and Sismai begot Shallum, 41 and Shallum begot Jekamiah, and Jekamiah begot Elishamaʽ.
42 And the sons of Jerahmeel’s brother Caleb were Meshaʽ his eldest; he was the father of Ziph; and the sons of Mareshah were the father of Hebron; 43 and the sons of Hebron were Korah and Tappuah and Rekem and Shemaʽ; 44 and Shemaʽ begot Raham the father of Jorkoʽam, and Rekem begot Shammai, 45 and Shammai’s son was Maʽon, and Maʽon was the father of Beth-Sur.
46 And Caleb’s concubine Ghephah bore Haran and Mosa and Gazes; and Mosa begot Gazes.
47 And Jahdai’s sons were Regem and Jotham and Geshan and Pelet and Ghephah and Shaʽaph.
48 And Caleb’s concubine Maʽacah bore Sheber and Tirhanah.
49 And Shaʽaph the father of Madmannah begot Sheva the father of Macbenah and of Gibea.
50 And Caleb’s daughter was ʽAcsah.
These were Caleb’s sons. The sons of Ephrathah’s eldest son Hur were Shobal the father of Kirjath-Jeʽarim, 51 Salma the father of Bethlehem, Hareph the father of Beth-Gader.
52 And Shobal the father of Kirjath-Jeʽarim had sons, Haroeh, half the Manahtites.
53 And the clans of Kirjath-Jeʽarim were the Ithrites and the Puthites and the Shumathites and the Mishraʽites; from these went out the Soreathites and the Eshtaulites.
54 The sons of Salma were Bethlehem and Netophathi, ʽAtroth, Beth-Joab, and half the Manahtites, the Soreites.
55 And the scribe clans that lived at Jaʽbes were Tirghathites, Shimeathites, Subathites.
Those were the Cainites that came in from Hammath, the father of the house of Recab.
3 And these were David’s sons who were born to him at Hebron: Amnon the eldest, by Ahinoʽam the Jezreʽelite; Daniel the second, by Abigail the Carmelite; 2 Absalom the third, son of Maʽacah the daughter of King Talmai of Geshur; Adonijah the fourth, son of Haggith; 3 Shephatiah the fifth, by Abital; Ithream the sixth, by his wife ʽEglah.
4 Six were born to him at Hebron; and he reigned there seven years and six months, and reigned at Jerusalem thirty-three years.
5 And these were born to him at Jerusalem: Shimea and Shobab and Nathan and Solomon, four by Bath-Shuaʽ the daughter of ʽAmmiel, 6 and Ibhar and Elishuaʽ and Eliphelet 7 and Nogah and Nepheg and Japhiaʽ 8 and Elishamaʽ and Eljadaʽ and Eliphelet
nine. 9 All David’s sons, besides sons of concubines; and Tamar was their sister.
10 And Solomon’s son was Rehoboam; his son, Abijah; his son, Asa; his son, Jehoshaphat; his son, 11 Joram; his son, Ahaziah; his son, Joash; his son, 12 Amasiah; his son, ʽAzariah; his son, Jotham; his son, 13 Ahaz; his son, Hezekiah; his son, Manasseh; his son, 14 Amon; his son, Josiah; 15 and Josiah’s sons were Johanan the eldest, Jehojakim the second, Sidkijah the third, Shallum the fourth; 16 and Jehojakim’s sons were his son Jeconiah, his son Sidkijah.
17 And the sons of Jeconiah as prisoner were his son Shealtiel 18 and Malkiram and Pedajah and Shenassar, Jekamiah, Hoshamaʽ, and Nedabiah; 19 and Pedajah’s sons were Zerubbabel and Shimei; and Zerubbabel’s sons were Meshullam and Hananiah (and Shelomith was their sister), 20 and Hashubah and Ohel and Berekiah and Hasadiah, Jushab Hesed five.
21 And Hananiah’s son was Pelatiah, and his son Isaiah; his son, Rephajah; his son, Arnan; his son, ʽObadiah; his son, 22 Shecaniah; and Shecaniah’s sons were Shemaʽiah, and Shemaʽiah’s sons were Hattush and Igal and Bariah and Neʽariah and Shaphat
six; 23 and Neʽariah’s sons were Eljoʽenai and Hezekiah and ʽAzrikam
three; 24 and Eljoʽenai’s sons were Hodaviah and Eljashib and Pelajah and ʽAkkub and Johanan and Delajah and ʽAnani seven.
4:1-43
4 Judah’s sons were Peres, Hesron, and Carmi and Hur and Shobal.
2 And Shobal’s son Reajah begot Jahath, and Jahath begot Ahumai and Lahad; these are the clans of the Soreathites.
3 And these are the father of ʽEtam, Jezreʽel and Ishma and Idbash (and their sister’s name was Haslelponi) 4 and Penuel the father of Gedor and ʽEzer the father of Hushah; these are the sons of Hur, eldest son of Ephrathah the father of Bethlehem.
5 And Ashhur the father of Tekoaʽ had two wives, Helah and Naʽarah; 6 and Naʽarah bore him Ahuzzam and Hepher and Temni and the Ahashtarite
these are Naʽarah’s sons; 7 and Helah’s sons were Sereth and Sohar and Ethnan and Kos, 8 and Kos begot ʽAnub and Hassobebah and the clans of Aharhel the son of Harum.
9 And Jaʽbes came to outrank his brothers; and his mother had named him Jaʽbes “because I had a hard time bearing him,” 10 but Jaʽbes called on the God of Israel, saying “If you will bless me and increase my territory, and your hand be with me, and you make pasturage so that I do not have hard times,” and God brought to pass what he asked.
11 And Kelub the brother of Shuhah begot Mehir; he was the father of Eshton, 12 and Eshton begot Beth-Rapha and Paseah and Tehinnah the father of ʽIr-Nahash; these were Recah’s men.
13 And Kenaz’s sons were Ghothniel and Serajah; and Ghothniel’s sons were Hathath and Meʽonothai, 14 and Meʽonothai begot Ghophrah; and Serajah begot Joab the father of Carpenters’ Valley
for they were carpenters.
15 And the sons of Caleb the son of Jephunneh were ʽIr and Elah and Naʽam; and Elah’s sons were Kenaz.
16 And Jehallelel’s sons were Ziph and Ziphah, Tirja and Asarel.
17 And ʽEzrah’s sons were Jether and Mered and ʽEpher and Jalon; and she conceived Miriam and Shammai and Ishbah the father of Eshtemoaʽ.
18 And his Judahite wife bore Jered the father of Gedor and Heber the father of Soco and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah; and these are the sons of the Pharaoh’s daughter Bithiah, whom Mered married.
19 And the sons of Hodijah’s wife, the sister of Naham the father of Keilah, were the Garmite and Eshtemoaʽ the Maʽacathite.
20 And the sons of Shimon were Amnon and Rinnah, Ben-Hanan and Tilon; and the sons of Ishei were Zoheth, and Zoheth’s son.
21 And the sons of Judah’s son Shelah were ʽEr the father of Lecah and Laghdah the father of Mareshah, and the clans of the Beth-Ashbeaʽ linen factory, 22 and Jokim and the men of Cozeba and Joash and Saraph who had Moab, and Jashubi-Lehem (the affairs are old-time ones).
23 These are the potters and those who lived at Netaim and Gederah; they lived there with the king on his business.
24 Simeon’s sons were Nemuel and Jamin, Jarib, Zerah, Saul, 25 Shallum his son, Mibsam his son, Mishmaʽ his son; 26 and Mishmaʽ’s sons were Hammuel his son, Zaccur his son, Shimei his son; 27 and Shimei had sixteen sons and six daughters, but his brothers did not have many sons, and all their clans did not become numerous comparably to the sons of Judah.
28 And they lived at Beer-Shebaʽ and Moladah and Hasar-Shuʽal 29 and at Bilhah and at ʽEsem and at Tolad 30 and at Bethuel and at Hormah and at Siklag 31 and at Beth-Marcaboth and at Hasar-Susim and at Beth-Biri and at Shaʽaraim; these were their cities till David became king.
32 And their villages were ʽEtam and ʽAjin, Rimmon and Token and ʽAshan, five cities, 33 and all their villages around these cities up to Baʽal.
This was their settlement, and they have their genealogies.
34 And Meshobab and Jamlec and Joshah the son of Amasiah 35 and Joel and Jehu the son of Joshibiah the son of Serajah the son of ʽAsiel 36 and Eljoʽenai and Jaʽakobah and Ishohajah and ʽAsajah and ʽAdiel and Isimiel and Benajah 37 and Ziza the son of Shiphei the son of Allon the son of Jedajah the son of Shimri the son of Shemaʽiah,
38 these who come in by name were princes in their clans, and their families spread greatly.
39 And they went at the entrance to Gerar to east of the valley looking for pasturage for their sheep and goats, 40 and found good fat pasturage, and the country spacious and quiet and prosperous (for those who used to live there were from Ham), 41 and these men who have been written down by name went in there in the days of King Hezekiah of Judah and made havoc of their tents and the Meʽunites who were found there, and destroyed them without quarter to remain a desolation to this day, and settled in their place, because there was pasturage there for their sheep and goats.
42 And of them, of the sons of Simeon, five hundred men went to the highland of Seʽir, with Pelatiah and Na’ariah and Rephajah and ʽUzziel the sons of Ishei at their head, 43 and struck down the surviving remnant of ʽAmalek, and are living there to this day.
5 And the sons of Reuben, Israel’s eldest son (for he was the eldest, but at his profaning his father’s couch the status of eldest was given to the sons of Israel’s son Joseph, but the genealogy is not to follow the status.
2 For Judah rose to preeminence among his brothers, and a warden out of him; but the status of eldest belongs to Joseph)
3 the sons of Reuben, Israel’s eldest son, were Hanoc and Pallu, Hesron and Carmi.
4 Joel’s sons were Shemaʽiah his son, Gog his son, Shimei his son, 5 Micah his son, Reajah his son, Baʽal his son, 6 Beerah his son, whom King Tiglath-Pilneser of Assyria deported; he was a prince of the Reubenites.
7 And his brothers by clans, in genealogy line by line, were Jeiel the chief and Zecariah 8 and Belaʽ the son of ʽAzaz the son of Shemaʽ the son of Joel
he lived at ʽAroʽer and up to Nebo and Baal-Meʽon, 9 and on the east he lived up into the wilderness in the direction of the river Euphrates, because their livestock had grown numerous in Gilead.
10 And in Saul’s days they made war with the Hagarites, and they fell by their hands, and they lived in their tents all along the east frontier of Gilead.
11 And the sons of Gad lived next them in the Bashan country up to Salcah: 12 Joel the chief, and Shapham the second, and Jaʽnai and Shaphat, in the Bashan; 13 and their brothers by their families, Micael and Meshullam and Shebaʽ and Jorai and Jaʽcan and Ziaʽ and ʽEber seven.
14 These were the sons of Abihail the son of Huri the son of Jaroah the son of Gilead the son of Micael the son of Jeshishai the son of Jahdo the son of Buz.
15 Ahi the son of ʽAbdiel the son of Guni was chief for their families.
16 And they lived in Gilead, in the Bashan and its dependencies, and on all the downs of Sharon to the extremities of them.
17 All of them had their census taken in the time of King Jotham of Judah and of King Jeroboam of Israel: 18 of the sons of Reuben and Gadites and the half of the tribe of Manasseh, of stalwart men, men to bear shield and sword and to bend bows, and trained in fighting, there were forty-four thousand seven hundred and sixty militia.
19 And they made war with the Hagarites and Jetur and Naphish and Nodab, 20 and were helped against them, and the Hagarites and all who were with them were given into their hands, because they cried to God in the war and he let himself be invoked because they had confidence in him.
21 And they captured their livestock, fifty thousand of their camels and two hundred and fifty thousand sheep and goats and two hundred thousand donkeys, and a hundred thousand living human beings
22 for many had fallen in the fighting, because the war was from God.
And they lived in their place till the deportation.
23 And the sons of the half of the tribe of Manasseh lived in the country from Bashan to Baal-Hermon and Senir and Mount Hermon; they were numerous.
24 And these were the heads of their families: ʽEpher and Ishei and Eliel and ʽAzriel and Jeremiah and Hodaviah and Jahdiel, solid men, men of reputation, heads of their families.
25 But they were unfaithful to their fathers’ God and prostituted themselves to go after the gods of the peoples of the country, whom God had rooted out before them; 26 and Israel’s God excited the spirit of King Pul of Assyria and of King Tiglath-Pilneser of Assyria, and he deported them, the Reubenites and the Gadites and the half of the tribe of Manasseh, and brought them to Halah and Habor and Hara and the river of Gozan, where they are to this day.
6:1-81
6 Levi’s sons were Gershon, Kehath, and Merari; 2 and Kehath’s sons were ʽAmram, Ishar, and Hebron and ʽUzziel; 3 and ʽAmram’s sons were Aaron and Moses and Miriam; and Aaron’s sons were Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
4 Eleazar begot Pinehas; Pinehas begot Abishuaʽ; 5 and Abishuaʽ begot Bukki; and Bukki begot ʽUzzi; and 6 ʽUzzi begot Zerahiah; and Zerahiah begot Merajoth; 7 and Merajoth begot Amariah; and Amariah begot Ahitub; 8 and Ahitub begot Sadok; and Sadok begot Ahimaʽas; 9 and Ahimaʽas begot ʽAzariah; and ʽAzariah begot Johanan; 10 and Johanan begot ʽAzariah
he was the one who served as priest in the house that Solomon built in Jerusalem; 11 and ʽAzariah begot Amariah; and Amariah begot Ahitub; 12 and Ahitub begot Sadok; and Sadok begot Shallum; 13 and Shallum begot Hilkijah; and Hilkijah begot ʽAzariah; and 14 ʽAzariah begot Serajah; and Serajah begot Jehosadak; 15 and Jehosadak went when Jehovah caused Judah and Jerusalem to be deported by Nebucadnessar’s hands.
16 Levi’s sons were Gershom, Kehath, and Merari.
17 And these are the names of Gershom’s sons: Libni and Shimei; 18 and Kehath’s sons were ʽAmram and Ishar and Hebron and ʽUzziel; 19 and Merari’s sons were Mahli and Mushi.
And these are the clans of the Levites, from their fathers.
20 Of Gershom’s, Libni his son, Jahath his son, Zimmah his son, 21 Joah his son, ʽIddo his son, Zerah his son, Jeathrai his son.
22 Kehath’s sons were ʽAmminadab his son, Korah his son, Assir his son, 23 Elkanah his son, and Ebjasaph his son, and Assir his son, 24 Tahath his son, Uriel his son, ʽUzzijah his son, and Saul his son.
25 And Elkanah’s sons were ʽAmasai and Ahimoth, 26 Elkanah his son, Suphai his son, and Nahath his son, 27 Eliab his son, Jeroham his son, Elkanah his son, Samuel his son; 28 and Samuel’s sons were Joel the eldest and Abijah the second.
29 Merari’s sons were Mahli, Libni his son, Shimei his son, ʽUzzah his son, 30 Shimea his son, Haggijah his son, Asajah his son.
31 And these are the ones David stationed over the singing of Jehovah’s house from the coming to rest of the ark, 32 and they were in service in song before the tabernacle of the tent of meeting until Solomon built Jehovah’s house in Jerusalem and they came to stand properly in their service.
33 And these are those who were stationed, and their sons: of the sons of the Kehathites, Heman the chorister the son of Joel the son of Samuel 34 the son of Elkanah the son of Jeroham the son of Eliel the son of Toah 35 the son of Suph the son of Elkanah the son of Mahath the son of ʽAmasai 36 the son of Elkanah the son of Joel the son of ʽAzariah the son of Sephaniah 37 the son of Tahath the son of Assir the son of Ebjasaph the son of Korah the 38 son of Ishar the son of Kehath the son of Levi the son of Israel, 39 and his brother Asaph who stood at his right hand, Asaph the son of Berekiah the son of Shimea 40 the son of Micael the son of Baghasejah the son of Malkijah 41 the son of Ethni the son of Zerah the son of ʽAdajah 42 the son of Ethan the son of Zimmah the son of Shimei 43 the son of Jahath the son of Gershom the son of Levi.
44 And Merari’s sons, their brothers, on the left hand: Ethan the son of Kishi the son of ʽAbdi the son of Malluc 45 the son of Hashabiah the son of Amasiah the son of Hilkijah 46 the son of Amsi the son of Bani the son of Shemer 47 the son of Mahli the son of Mushi the son of Merari the son of Levi.
48 And their brothers the Levites were given for all service of the tabernacle of God’s house; 49 and Aaron and his sons made burnings on the altar of burnt-offering and on the altar of incense for all the most sacred business and for purging Israel in accordance with all that God’s servant Moses commanded.
50 And these were Aaron’s sons: Eleazar his son, Pinehas his son, Abishuaʽ his son, 51 Bukki his son, ‘Uzzi his son, Zerahiah his son, 52 Merajoth his son, Amariah his son, Ahitub his son, 53 Sadok his son, Ahimaʽas his son.
54 And these were their domiciles by their encampments in their territory.
For the sons of Aaron: for the Kehathite clans, because they had the lot, 55 they were given Hebron in the country of Judah and its glebes around it, 56 but the range of the city and its villages they gave to Caleb the son of Jephunneh; 57 and to the sons of Aaron they gave the cities of asylum, Hebron, and Libnah and its glebes, and Jattir, and Eshtemoaʽ and its glebes, 58 and Hilen and its glebes, Debir and its glebes, 59 and ʽAshan and its glebes, and Juttah and its glebes, and Beth-Shemesh and its glebes, 60 and out of the tribe of Benjamin Gibeon and its glebes and Gebaʽ and its glebes and ʽAlemeth and its glebes and ʽAnathoth and its glebes; all their cities came to thirteen cities with their glebes.
61 And for the rest of the sons of Kehath by their clans, out of the tribe of Ephraim and out of the tribe of Dan and out of half the tribe of Manasseh by lot ten cities; 62 and for the sons of Gershom by their clans, out of the tribe of Issacar and out of the tribe of Asher and out of the tribe of Naphtali and out of the tribe of Manasseh in Bashan thirteen cities; 63 and for the sons of Merari by their clans, out of the tribe of Reuben and out of the tribe of Gad and out of the tribe of Zebulun by lot twelve cities.
64 And the sons of Israel gave to the Levites the cities and their glebes.
65 And they gave by lot out of the tribe of Judah and out of the tribe of Simeon and out of the tribe of Benjamin these cities which are to be named.
66 And for the clans of the sons of Kehath, the cities of their territory were, out of the tribe of Ephraim 67 they gave them the cities of asylum, Shekem and its glebes, in the Ephraim highland, and Gezer and its glebes, 68 and Jokneam and its glebes, and Beth-Horon and its glebes, 69 and Aijalon and its glebes, and Gath-Rimmon and its glebes, 70 and out of the half-tribe of Manasseh ʽAner and its glebes, and Ibleam and its glebes, for the clan of the rest of the sons of Kehath.
71 For the sons of Gershom, out of the clan of half the tribe of Manasseh Golan in the Bashan and its glebes, and ʽAshtaroth and its glebes, 72 and out of the tribe of Issacar Kedesh and its glebes, and Daberath and its glebes, 73 and Ramoth and its glebes, and ʽAnem and its glebes, 74 and out of the tribe of Asher Mashal and its glebes, and ʽAbdon and its glebes, 75 and Hukok and its glebes, and Rehob and its glebes, 76 and out of the tribe of Naphtali Kedesh in the Mark and its glebes, and Hammon and its glebes, and Kirjathaim and its glebes.
77 And for the rest of the sons of Merari, out of the tribe of Zebulun Jokneam and its glebes, and Kartah and its glebes, and Rimmono and its glebes, and Tabor and its glebes, 78 and on the other side of the Jordan at Jericho, east of the Jordan, out of the tribe of Reuben Beser in the wilderness and its glebes, and Jahsah and its glebes, 79 and Kedemoth and its glebes, and Mephaʽath and its glebes, 80 and out of the tribe of Gad Ramoth in Gilead and its glebes, and Mahanaim and its glebes, 81 and Heshbon and its glebes, and Jaʽzer and its glebes.
7 And Issacar’s sons were Tolaʽ and Puah, Jashib and Shimron, four of them.
2 And Tolaʽ’s sons were ʽUzzi and Rephajah and Jeriel and Jahmai and Ibsam, heads of their families of Tolaʽ’s, solid men; line by line, their number in David’s time was twenty-two thousand and six hundred.
3 And ʽUzzi’s sons were Izrahiah; and Izrahiah’s sons were Micael and ʽObadiah and Joel and Isshijah
five, all heads; and about them, 4 line by line by families, raiding bands for military service, thirty-six thousand, because they had numerous wives and sons.
5 And of their brothers of all the clans of Issacar, stalwart men, there were eighty-seven thousand. All had their genealogical register.
6 Benjamin’s sons were Belaʽ and Beker and Jediʽael, three of them.
7 And Belaʽ’s sons were Esbon and ʽUzzi and ʽUzziel and Jerimoth and ʽIri, five, heads of families, stalwart men, and their genealogical register was twenty-two thousand and thirty-four.
8 And Beker’s sons were Zemirah and Joghash and Eliʽezer and Eljoʽenai and ʽOmri and Jeremoth and Abijah and ʽAnathoth and ʽAlemeth; all these were Beker’s sons, 9 and their genealogical register, line by line, heads of families, was twenty thousand and two hundred.
10 And Jediʽael’s sons were Bilhan, and Bilhan’s were Jeghush and Benjamin and Ehud and Kenaʽanah and Zethan and Tarshish and Ahishahar; 11 all these were Jediʽael’s sons by heads of families, stalwart men, seventeen thousand and two hundred who came out with the militia for war.
12 And Shuppim and Huppim were sons of ʽIr; Hushim were sons of Aher.
13 The sons of Naphtali were Jahsiel and Guni and Jeser and Shallum, the sons of Bilhah.
14 The sons of Manasseh, whom his Syrian concubine bore: she bore Makir the father of Gilead.
15 And Makir took a wife for Huppim and Shuppim, and his sister’s name was Maʽacah; and the second son’s name was Silpahad, and Silpahad had daughters.
16 And Makir’s wife Maʽacah bore a son and named him Peresh, and his brother’s name was Sheresh, and his sons were Ulam and Rekem, 17 and Ulam’s sons were Bedan; these are the sons of Gilead the son of Makir the son of Manasseh.
18 And his sister Hammoleketh bore Ishhod and Abiezer and Mahlah.
19 And Shemidaʽ’s sons were Ahjan and Shekem and Likhi and Aniʽam.
20 And Ephraim’s sons were Shuthelah and Bered his son and Tahath his son and Eleadah his son and Tahath his son 21 and Zabad his son and Shuthelah his son, and ʽEzer and Elead; and the men of Gath who were born in the country killed them, because they went down to take their livestock; 22 and their father Ephraim mourned a long time, and his brothers came to comfort him.
23 And he went in to his wife, and she conceived and had a son, and he named him Beriʽah because it was going badly with his family.
24 And his daughter was Sheerah; and she built Beth-Horon, the lower and the upper, and Uzzen-Sheerah.
25 And Rephah was his son, and Resheph, and Telah his son, and Tahan his son, 26 Laghdan his son, ʽAmmihud his son, Elishamaʽ his son, 27 Nun his son, Joshuaʽ his son.
28 And their properties and domiciles were Bethel and its dependencies, and on the east Naʽaran, and on the west Gezer and its dependencies, and Shekem and its dependencies, to Ghaijah and its dependencies.
29 And in the hands of the sons of Manasseh were Beth-Shean and its dependencies, Taʽanac and its dependencies, Megiddo and its dependencies, Dor and its dependencies.
In these lived the sons of Joseph the son of Israel.
30 Asher’s sons were Imnah and Ishvah and Ishvi and Beriʽah and their sister Serah; 31 and Beriʽah’s sons were Heber and Malkiel
he was the father of Birzoth; 32 and Heber begot Japhlet and Shomer and Hotham and their sister Shuʽah; 33 and Japhlet’s sons were Pasac and Bimhal and ʽAshvath
these were Japhlet’s sons; 34 and his brother Shemer’s sons were Rohgah and Hubbah and Aram; 35 and his brother Helem’s sons were Sophah and Imnaʽ and Shelesh and ʽAmal, 36 and Sophah’s sons were Suah and Harnepher and Shughal and Beri and Imrah, 37 Beser and Hod and Shamma and Shilshah and Ithran and Beera, 38 and Jether’s sons were Jephunneh and Pispah and Ara, 39 and ʽUlla’s sons were Arah and Hanniel and Risja.
40 All these were Asher’s sons, the heads of families, sifted out, solid men, heads of the princes, and their genealogical register was by militia service in war; their number was twenty-six thousand men.
8 And Benjamin begot Belaʽ his eldest, Ashbel the second, and Ahrah the third, 2 Nohah the fourth, and Rapha the fifth.
3 And Belaʽ had sons, Addar and Gera and Abihud 4 and Abishuaʽ and Naʽaman and Ahoah 5 and Gera and Shephuphan and Huram.
6 And these are Ehud’s sons; these are heads of families of the inhabitants of Gebaʽ, but they deported them to Manahath, 7 and Naʽaman and Ahijah and Gera; he deported them; and he begot ʽUzza and Ahihud.
8 And Shaharaim begot in the Moabite countryside, from his sending them
his wives Hushim and Baʽara
away, he begot, 9 from his wife Hodesh, Jobab and Sibja and Mesha and Malcam 10 and Jeghus and Sacjah and Mirmah; these were his sons, heads of families.
11 And from Hushim he begot Abitub and Elpaʽal; 12 and Elpaʽal’s sons were ʽEber and Misheam and Shemed
he built Ono and Lod and its dependencies
13 and Beriʽah and Shemaʽ; they were heads of families of the inhabitants of Aijalon; they drove the inhabitants of Gath into flight; 14 and his brother Shashak and Jeremoth 15 and Zebadiah and ʽArad and ʽEder 16 and Micael and Ishpah and Joha, the sons of Beriʽah; 17 and Zebadiah and Meshullam and Hizki and Heber 18 and Ishmerai and Izliah and Jobab, the sons of Elpaʽal; 19 and Jakim and Zicri and Zabdi 20 and Eliʽenai and Sillethai and Eliel 21 and ʽAdajah and Beraiah and Shimrath, the sons of Shimei; 22 and Ishpan and ʽEber and Eliel 23 and ʽAbdon and Zicri and Hanan 24 and Hananiah and ʽElam and ʽAnathothijah 25 and Iphdejah and Peniel, the sons of Shashak; 26 and Shamsherai and Shehariah and ʽAthaliah 27 and Jaghareshiah and Elijah and Zicri, the sons of Jeroham.
28 These were heads of families line by line, headmen; these lived in Jerusalem.
29 And at Gibeon lived Jeiel the father of Gibeon, whose wife’s name was Maʽacah, 30 and his eldest son ʽAbdon and Sur and Kish and Baʽal and Ner and Nadab 31 and Gedor and Ahjo and Zeker 32 and Mikloth; and Mikloth begot Shimah, and they too lived fronting their brothers at Jerusalem with their brothers.
33 And Ner begot Kish, and Kish begot Saul, and Saul begot Jonathan and Malki-Shuaʽ and Abinadab and Eshbaal, 34 and Jonathan’s son was Meribaal, and Meribaal begot Micah; 35 and Micah’s sons were Pithon and Melec and Tareaʽ and Ahaz, 36 and Ahaz begot Jehoʽaddah, and Jehoʽaddah begot ʽAlemeth and ʽAzmaveth and Zimri, and Zimri begot Mosa, 37 and Mosa begot Binea; Raphah his son, Eleasah his son, Asel his son; 38 and Asel had six sons, and these are their names: ʽAzrikam, Bokeru, and Ishmaʽel and Sheʽariah and ʽObadiah and Hanan
all these were Asel’s sons; 39 and his brother ʽEsek’s sons were Ulam his eldest, Jeghush the second, and Eliphelet the third.
40 And Ulam’s sons were stalwart men, archers, with many sons and grandsons, a hundred and fifty of them.
All these were Benjamin’s sons.
9:1-44
9 And all Israel was genealogically listed, and will be found set down in the book of the kings of Israel.
And Judah was deported to Babylon for their unfaithfulness.
2 And the first residents, who were on their properties in their cities, were Israel, the priests, the Levites, and the temple-servants.
3 And there lived in Jerusalem, of the sons of Judah and of the sons of Benjamin and of the sons of Ephraim and Manasseh, 4 Ghuthai the son of ʽAmmihud the son of ʽOmri the son of Imri the son of Bani, of the sons of Peres the son of Judah; 5 and of the Shelanites ʽAsajah the eldest and his sons; 6 and of the sons of Zerah Jeʽuel; and their brothers, six hundred and ninety.
7 And of the sons of Benjamin Sallu the son of Meshullam the son of Hodaviah the son of Hassenuah, 8 and Ibnejah the son of Jeroham, and Elah the son of ʽUzzi the son of Micri, and Meshullam the son of Shephatiah the son of Reghuel the son of Ibnijah, 9 and their brothers, line by line, nine hundred and fifty-six; all these were men that were ancestral heads of their families.
10 And of the priests Jedaʽiah and Jehojarib and Jakin 11 and ʽAzariah the son of Hilkijah the son of Meshullam the son of Sadok the son of Merajoth the son of Ahitub, warden of the house of God, 12 and ʽAdajah the son of Jeroham the son of Pashhur the son of Malkijah, and Maʽasai the son of ʽAdiel the son of Jahzerah the son of Meshullam the son of Meshillemith the son of Immer, 13 and their brothers, heads of their families, seventeen hundred and sixty, men stalwart for the business of the service of the house of God.
14 And of the Levites Shemaʽiah the son of Hasshub the son of ʽAzrikam the son of Hashabiah of the sons of Merari, 15 and Bakbakkar, Heresh, and Galal and Mattaniah the son of Mica the son of Zicri the son of Asaph, 16 and ʽObadiah the son of Shemaʽiah the son of Galal the son of Jeduthun, and Berekiah the son of Asa the son of Elkanah who lived in the Netophathite villages.
17 And the gatemen were Shallum and ʽAkkub and Talmon and Ahiman and their brothers; Shallum was the head, 18 and is till now at the king’s gate on the east.
They were the gatemen for the camp of the sons of Levi, 19 and Shallum the son of Kore the son of Ebjasaph the son of Korah and his brothers for their family the Korahites over the business of the service, the threshold-guards for the Tent, and their fathers over Jehovah’s camp, the entrance-guards.
20 Pinehas the son of Eleazar was warden over them formerly
Jehovah be with him; 21 Zecariah the son of Meshelemiah was gateman at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting.
22 All of them, the eligibles for gatemen at the thresholds, came to two hundred and twelve; their genealogical listing was done in their villages.
Them David and Samuel the seer had established in their trust, 23 and they and their sons were over the gates for Jehovah’s house, for the tent-house; 24 the gatemen were by watches on the four sides, east, west, north, and south, 25 and their brothers were in their villages to come in for seven days periodically with these, 26 for they were on honor.
Those were the four sergeants of the gatemen.
The Levites were over the vestries and over the storerooms in the house of God, 27 and lodged around the house of God at night, because they were under a responsibility and had charge of the opening morning by morning; 28 and some of them were over the implements for the service, for they passed them in by count and passed them out by count, 29 and some of them were assigned to be over the furnishings and over all the sacred vessels and over the farina and the wine and the oil and the frankincense and the spices.
30 But some of the sons of the priests did the preparation of the spices; 31 and Mattithiah, one of the Levites (he was the eldest-born of Shallum the Korahite), was entrusted with the pancake-making; 32 and some of the sons of the Kehathites, brothers of theirs, were over the stacked bread, to prepare it sabbath by sabbath.
33 And these are the singers, Levite heads of families, exempt from service in the vestries because day and night they were under obligation in their function:
34 These were Levite heads of families line by line, headmen; these lived in Jerusalem.
35 And at Gibeon lived the father of Gibeon, Jeiel, whose wife’s name was Maʽacah, 36 and his eldest son ʽAbdon and Sur and Kish and Baʽal and Ner and Nadab 37 and Gedor and Ahjo and Zecariah and Mikloth; 38 and Mikloth begot Shimam, and they too lived fronting their brothers at Jerusalem with their brothers.
39 And Ner begot Kish, and Kish begot Saul, and Saul begot Jonathan and Malki-Shuaʽ and Abinadab and Eshbaal, 40 and Jonathan’s son was Meribaal, and Meribaal begot Micah; 41 and Micah’s sons were Pithon and Melec and Tahreaʽ and Ahaz, 42 and Ahaz begot Jaʽdah, and Jaʽdah begot ʽAlemeth and ʽAzmaveth and Zimri, and Zimri begot Mosa, 43 and Mosa begot Binea and Rephajah his son, Eleasah his son, Asel his son; 44 and Asel had six sons, and these are their names: ʽAzrikam, Bokeru, and Ishmaʽel and Sheʽariah and ʽObadiah and Hanan
these were Asel’s sons.
10:1-14
10 And the Philistines fought the Israelites, and the men of Israel ran before the Philistines, and fell stabbed through on Mount Gilboaʽ.
2 And the Philistines kept close after Saul and his sons; and the Philistines killed Saul’s sons Jonathan and Abinadab and Malki-Shuaʽ.
3 And the onslaught on Saul was fierce, and the archers hit him, and he was hurt by the archers.
4 And Saul said to his squire “Draw your sword and run me through with it, for fear these uncircumcised fellows should come and amuse themselves with me”; but his squire would not, because he was too much afraid.
But Saul took his sword and threw himself on it; 5 and his squire saw that Saul was dead, and he too threw himself on his own sword and died.
6 And Saul and his three sons and all his household died.
7 And all the men of Israel in the Vale saw that they had fled and that Saul and his sons were dead, and they left their cities and fled, and the Philistines came and lived in the cities.
8 And on the next day the Philistines came to strip the killed, and found Saul and his sons fallen on Mount Gilboaʽ; 9 and they stripped him and took his head and his equipment and sent them around through the Philistine country to bring the news to their idols and the people, 10 and put his equipment in the temple of their god; and his skull they pegged up in the temple of Dagon.
11 And all Jabesh in Gilead heard what the Philistines had done to Saul; 12 and all the bravest men set out and took up the remains of Saul and his sons and brought them to Jabesh, and buried their bones under the terebinth tree at Jabesh, and fasted seven days.
13 And Saul died for his unfaithfulness that he had committed against Jehovah as to Jehovah’s word which he did not observe, and also in that he asked for a medium to inquire of, 14 and did not inquire of Jehovah, and he brought him to death and diverted the kingship to David the son of Jesse.
11:1-47
11 And all Israel gathered to David at Hebron saying “Here we are, your flesh and blood.
2 Even formerly, even when Saul was king, it was you that led Israel out and in; and your God Jehovah said to you ‘You shall be shepherd of my people Israel, you shall be warden over my people Israel.’” 3 And all the elders of Israel came to the king at Hebron, and David gave pledges to them at Hebron before Jehovah, and they anointed David king over Israel in accordance with Jehovah’s word by Samuel,
4 And David and all Israel went to Jerusalem, that is, Jebus; and the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the country, were there.
5 And the inhabitants of Jebus said to David “You will not get in here.”
And David took the fastness of Sion, what is now David’s City.
6 And David said “Anyone who strikes down a Jebusite first shall be chief and captain”; and Joab the son of Serujah was first up, and became chief.
7 And David fixed his residence in the fastness (that is why they call it David’s City) 8 and built the fortifications of the city all round, from the Millo the full circuit, and Joab renewed the remainder of the city.
9 And David grew greater and greater, and Jehovah of Armies was with him.
10 And these were David’s chief champions who were active in his service in his reign over all Israel, to make him king in accordance with Jehovah’s word by Samuel.
11 And this is the count of the champions David had: Ishbaal the son of Hacmoni, head of the Thirty; he brandished his spear over three hundred killed at one time.
12 And next to him Eleazar the son of Dodo the Ahohite; he was among the Three Champions; 13 he had been with David at Pas-Dammim, and the Philistines had come together there for war, and there was a field full of barley, and the people had fled from the Philistines; 14 and he took his stand in the middle of the field and rescued it; and they defeated the Philistines, and Jehovah granted a great victory.
15 And three of the Chief Thirty went down to the rock to David at the cave of ʽAdullam, when a Philistine army was camping in Ghost Hollow; 16 and David was in the fastness then, and the Philistine prefect was then at Bethlehem.
17 And David was taken with a craving, and said “I wish I had a drink of water out of the Bethlehem well at the gate”; 18 and the three burst through the Philistine camp and drew water out of the Bethlehem well at the gate and carried it away to David.
But David would not drink it, but poured it out as an offering to Jehovah, 19 and said “My God forbid the thought of my doing this: shall I drink these men’s blood with their lives in it?” because they had brought it at the risk of their lives; and he would not drink it.
20 And Joab’s brother Abishai, he was head of the Three; and he brandished his spear over three hundred killed, and used to be named among the Three.
21 He was more honored in fame than the Three, and became captain over them, but he did not get into the Three.
22 Benajah the son of Jehojadaʽ, a man of mettle and of many exploits, from Kabseel: it was he who killed the two Ariels of Moab, and who went down and killed the lion in the cistern on the day of the snowstorm, 23 and who killed the Egyptian, a tall man, seven and a half feet, the Egyptian having in his hand a spear like a weaver’s pole and he going down to him with a cudgel and snatching the spear out of the Egyptian’s hand and killing him with his own spear.
24 These things Benajah the son of Jehojadaʽ did, and used to be named among the Three Champions; 25 he was, be it noted, more honored than the Thirty, but did not get into the Three; but David set him over his guard.
26 And the champions of the troops: Joab’s brother ʽAsahel, Elhanan the son of Dodo from Bethlehem, 27 Shammoth the Harodite, Heles the Pelonite, 28 ʽIra the son of ʽIkkesh the Tekoʽite, Abiezer the ʽAnathothite, 29 Sibbecai the Hushathite, ʽIlai the Ahohite, 30 Maharai the Netophathite, Heled the son of Baʽanah the Netophathite, 31 Ithai the son of Ribai from Gibeah of the Benjamites, Benajah the Pireathonite, 32 Hurai from the Gaʽash ravines, Abiel the ʽArbathite, 33 ʽAzmaveth the Baharumite, Eljahba the Shaʽalbonite, 34 the sons of Hashem the Gizonite, Jonathan the son of Shagah the Hararite, 35 Ahiam the son of Sacar the Hararite, Eliphal the son of Ur, 36 Hepher the Mekerathite, Ahijah the Pilonite, 37 Hesro the Carmelite, Naʽarai the son of Ezbai, 38 Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibhar the son of Hagri, 39 Selek the ʽAmmonite, Naharai the Beerothite, squire to Joab the son of Serujah, 40 ʽIra the Jetherite, Gareb the Jetherite, 41 Urijah the Hittite, Zabad the son of Ahlai, 42 ʽAdina the son of Shiza the Reubenite, a chief of the Reubenites and about him thirty, 43 Hanan the son of Maʽacah and Joshaphat the Mathnite, 44 ʽUzija the ʽAshterathite, Shamaʽ and Jeʽuel the sons of Hotham the ʽAroʽerite, 45 Jediʽael the son of Shimri and his brother Joha the Tisite, 46 Eliel the Mahumite and Jeribai and Joshaviah the sons of Elnaʽam, and Ithmah the Moabite, 47 Eliel and ʽObed and Jaʽasiel the Mesobajah.
12:1-40
12 And these are those who came to David at Siklag while he was still under ban from Saul the son of Kish; and they were among the champions, a great help in battle, 2 armed with bows, using both right and left hand to send stones and arrows with the bow, brothers of Saul’s from Benjamin: 3 Ahiʽezer the chief and Joash, the sons of Hasshemaʽah the Gibeathite, and Jeziel and Pelet the sons of ʽAzmaveth, and Beracah, and Jehu the ʽAnathothite, 4 and Ishmaʽiah the Gibeonite, a champion among the Thirty and over the Thirty, and Jeremiah and Jahaziel and Johanan and Jozabad the Gederathite, 5 Eleuzai and Jerimoth and Beʽaliah and Shemariah and Shephatiah the Hariphite, 6 Elkanah and Isshijah and ʽAzarel and Joʽezer and Jashobeam the Korahites, 7 and Joʽelah and Zebadiah the sons of Jeroham from Gedor.
8 And of the Gadites there broke away to David at the fastness in the wilderness the stoutest champions, men to fight in the army, to stand in line with shield and pike, with faces like lions’ faces and in swiftness like gazelles on the mountains, 9 ʽEzer the first, ʽObadiah the second, Eliab the third, 10 Mishmannah the fourth, Jeremiah the fifth, 11 ʽAttai the sixth, Eliel the seventh, 12 Johanan the eighth, Elzabad the ninth, 13 Jeremiah the tenth, Macbannai the eleventh.
14 These were sons of Gad, heads in army service, one for a hundred the least and the greatest for a thousand.
15 These were the ones who crossed the Jordan in the first month when it was filling its floodplain and drove back all the vales to east and to west.
16 And there came some of the sons of Benjamin and Judah to David at the fastness; 17 and David came out before them and answered them “If you have come amicably to me to help me, I will be one in heart with you; but if to cheat me for my foes, for no injury at my hands, let the God of our fathers see and give his verdict.” 18 And ʽAmasai, head of the thirty, was inspired: “For you, David, and with you, son of Jesse; peace, peace to you and peace to your helpers, because your God helps you.”
And David received them and put them among the heads of the raiders.
19 And of Manasseh there fell off to David when he came with the Philistines to the battle against Saul (but he did not help them, because on advice the Sarns of the Philistines sent him away, thinking “He will come down on our heads, deserting to his master Saul”); 20 when he was on his way to Siklag there fell off to him, of Manasseh, ʽAdnah and Jozabad and Jediʽael and Micael and Jozabad and Elihu and Sillethai, the chiefs of thousands of Manasseh; 21 and they helped David against the raiders, for all of them were stalwart champions; and they became captains in the army.
22 At every time, day by day, there came to David to help him so many as to make a great camp, like God’s camp.
23 And these are the numbers of the heads of the body armed for service that came to David in Hebron to turn over Saul’s kingship to him in accordance with Jehovah’s voice: 24 Sons of Judah, carrying shield and pike, sixty-eight hundred armed for service.
25 Of the sons of Simeon, stalwart champions for the service, seventy-one hundred.
26 Of the sons of the Levites, forty-six hundred, 27 and Jehojadaʽ the warden for Aaron and with him thirty-seven hundred, 28 and Sadok, a youth, a stalwart champion, and his family, twenty-two captains.
29 And of the sons of Benjamin, Saul’s brothers, three thousand; but up to then the majority of them were maintaining allegiance to Saul’s family.
30 And of the sons of Ephraim twenty thousand and eight hundred, stalwart men, men of reputation in their families.
31 And of the half-tribe of Manasseh eighteen thousand who were picked out by name to come to make David king.
32 And of the sons of Issacar, men with sagacious knowledge of times to know what Israel was to do, their heads two hundred and all their brothers following their directions.
33 And of Zebulun, men who went out on service, who went into line of battle with all fighting equipment, five thousand, and to hold with no halfheartedness.
34 And of Naphtali a thousand captains, and with them, with shield and spear, thirty-seven thousand.
35 And of the Danites, men who went into line of battle, twenty-eight thousand and six hundred.
36 And of Asher, men who went out in service entering line of battle, forty thousand.
37 And from across the Jordan, of the Reubenites and the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh, with all equipment for service in war, a hundred and twenty thousand.
38 All these were fighting men who would hold in line of battle with whole heart, who had come to Hebron to make David king over all Israel; and the remainder of Israel too was unanimously for making David king.
39 And they were there with David three days, eating and drinking; for their brothers had made preparations for them, 40 and also those who were near them, out to Issacar and Zebulun and Naphtali, were bringing provisions on donkeys and camels and mules and cows, flour products and cakes of figs and clusters of raisins and wine and oil and cattle and sheep and goats in quantities, because there was merrymaking in Israel.
13 And David consulted with the captains of thousands and of hundreds, every official; 2 and David said to all the assembly of Israel “If you think it best, and it is sanctioned by our God Jehovah, let us send to the remainder of our brothers in all parts of the land of Israel, and with them the Levite priests in their glebe cities, and have them gather to us, 3 and we will get the ark of our God over to us; for we did not look it up in Saul’s time.” 4 And all the assembly said they should do so, because the proposal suited all the people.
5 And David assembled all Israel from the Delta River in Egypt to Lebo-Hamath to bring the ark of God from Kirjath-Jeʽarim; 6 and David and all Israel went up to Baalah, to Kirjath-Jeʽarim, which belongs to Judah, to bring up from there the ark of God Jehovah who sits upon the cherubs, which happened to be there.
7 And they took the ark of God in a new cart out of Abinadab’s house; and ʽUzza and Ahjo were driving for the cart, 8 and David and all Israel were playing before God with all energy and with songs and with lyres and harps and tambourines and cymbals and trumpets.
9 And they came to Kidon’s threshing-floor, and ʽUzza put out his hand to hold the ark, because the oxen jolted it.
10 And Jehovah was angry with ʽUzza, and smote him down for having put out his hand to the ark, and he died there before God.
11 And David was shocked that Jehovah had scathed ʽUzza, and called that place ʽUzza’s Scathe, which name it bears to this day.
12 And David became afraid of God that day, thinking “How can I bring the ark of God to my home?” 13 And David did not move the ark to his home in David’s City, but took it into the house of ʽObed-Edom the Gathite.
14 And the ark of God remained with ʽObed-Edom’s family in his house three months, and Jehovah blessed ʽObed-Edom’s family and everything that belonged to him.
14:1-17
14 And King Hiram of Tyre sent envoys to David, and cedar timber and masons and carpenters to build him a house.
2 And David knew that Jehovah had established him as king over Israel because his empire was exalted on high for the sake of his people Israel.
3 And David took more wives at Jerusalem; and David begot more children.
4 And these are the names of the sons he had at Jerusalem: Shammuaʽ and Shobab, Nathan and Solomon 5 and Ibhar and Elishuaʽ and Elphelet 6 and Nogah and Nepheg and Japhiaʽ 7 and Elishamaʽ and Beʽeljadaʽ and Eliphelet.
8 And the Philistines heard that David had been anointed king over all Israel; 9 and all the Philistines came up to look for David; 10 and David heard of it and went out before them.
And the Philistines had come and spread out in Ghost Hollow; and David put the question to God “Shall I go up against the Philistines, and will you give them into my hands?” and Jehovah said to him “Go up, and I will give them into your hands.” 11 And they went up at Baal-Perasim, and David defeated them there; and David said “God has burst my enemies by my hands like a bursting dam”; hence the place is named Baal-Perasim, “Baal of bursts.” 12 And they left their gods there, and by David’s orders they were burned up.
13 And again the Philistines spread out in the vale, 14 and David again questioned God, and God said to him “Do not go up behind them; make a circuit away from them and come to them opposite the pear-trees, 15 so that when you hear the sound of stepping in the tops of the pear-trees, then you may come out with an attack because God has gone out before you to strike down the Philistine army.” 16 And David did as God ordered, and they routed the Philistine army from Gibeon to Gezer.
17 And David’s fame went out through all countries, and Jehovah put the dread of him upon all nations.
15:1-29
15 And he made himself houses in David’s City, and prepared a place for the ark of God and pitched a tent for it.
2 Then David said “There should nobody carry the ark of God but the Levites, because they were the ones Jehovah chose for carrying the ark of God and for tending it forever.” 3 And David assembled all Israel at Jerusalem to bring the ark of Jehovah up to its place which he had prepared for it.
4 And David brought together the sons of Aaron and the Levites: 5 for the sons of Kehath, Uriel the chief, and a hundred and twenty his brothers; 6 for the sons of Merari, ʽAsajah the chief, and a hundred and twenty his brothers; 7 for the sons of Gershom, Joel the chief, and a hundred and thirty his brothers; 8 for the sons of Elisaphan, Shemaʽiah the chief, and two hundred his brothers; 9 for the sons of Hebron, Eliel the chief, and eighty his brothers; 10 for the sons of ʽUzziel, ʽAmminadab the chief, and a hundred and twelve his brothers.
11 And David called the priests Sadok and Abiathar, and the Levites Uriel, ʽAsajah, and Joel, Shemaʽiah and Eliel and ʽAmminadab, 12 and said to them “You are the Levite heads of families; hallow yourselves, you and your brothers, and bring up the ark of Israel’s God Jehovah to what I have prepared for it.
13 For because it was not you the first time our God Jehovah scathed us because we did not attend to it in the regular way.” 14 And the priests and Levites hallowed themselves to bring up the ark of Israel’s God Jehovah; 15 and the sons of the Levites carried the ark of God, as Moses had commanded in accordance with Jehovah’s word, on their shoulders by poles over them.
16 And David told the chiefs of the Levites to station their brothers the singers with musical instruments, harps and lyres and sonorous cymbals to make a high sound of gladness.
17 And the Levites stationed Heman the son of Joel, and of his brothers Asaph the son of Berekiah, and of their brothers the sons of Merari Ethan the son of Kushajah, 18 and with them their brothers to take second parts, Zecariah and Jaʽaziel and Shemiramoth and Jehiel and ʽUnni and Eliab and Benajah and Maʽasejah and Mattithiah and Eliphelehu and Miknejah and ʽObed-Edom and Jeiel the gatemen; 19 and the singers Heman, Asaph, and Ethan were with bronze cymbals to clang, 20 and Zecariah and ʽAziel and Shemiramoth and Jehiel and ‘Unni and Eliab and Maʽasejah and Benajah with harps of high pitch, 21 and Mattithiah and Eliphelehu and Miknejah and ʽObed-Edom and Jeiel and ʽAzaziah with lyres of bass pitch to keep the time.
22 And Kenaniah, chief of the Levites in carrying, was manager about the carrying, because he had good judgment; 23 and Berekiah and Elkanah were gatemen for the ark; 24 and the priests Shebaniah and Joshaphat and Nethanel and ʽAmasai and Zecariah and Benajah and Eliʽezer blew the trumpets before the ark of God; and ʽObed-Edom and Jehijah were gatemen for the ark.
25 And David and the elders of Israel and the captains of thousands were the marchers to bring the ark of Jehovah’s covenant up from ʽObed-Edom’s house with festivity.
26 And when God helped the Levites who carried the ark of Jehovah’s covenant, they sacrificed seven steers and seven rams.
27 And David was attired in a linen robe, and all the Levites who carried the ark and the singers and Kenaniah the chief of the carrying of the singers; and David had a linen ephod on him.
28 And all Israel brought up the ark of Jehovah’s covenant with cheering and blasts of ram-horns and with trumpets and with sonorous cymbals and with harps and lyres.
29 And when the ark of Jehovah’s covenant came to David’s City, Mical the daughter of Saul looked out through the window and saw King David dancing and playing, and felt a contempt for him.
16:1-43
16 And they brought the ark of God in and set it in the tent David had pitched for it, and presented burnt-offerings and welfare-sacrifices before God.
2 And when David finished offering the burnt-offering and the welfare-sacrifices he blessed the people in the name of Jehovah,
3 and distributed to all the men of Israel, women as well as men, a biscuit apiece and a steak and a cake of raisins.
4 And he put before the ark of Jehovah some of the Levites as attendants and to sing for the memorial and give thanks and praise to Israel’s God Jehovah:
5 Asaph the head, and second under him Zecariah, Jeiel and Shemiramoth and Jehiel and Mattithiah and Eliab and Benajah and ʽObed-Edom and Jeiel, with instruments, harps and lyres and Asaph sounding cymbals, 6 and the priests Benajah and Jahaziel with perpetual trumpets before the ark of God’s covenant.
7 On that day David then first put the giving of thanks to Jehovah into the hands of Asaph and his brothers:
8 “Thank Jehovah, proclaim his name, make known among the peoples his deeds;
9 Sing for him, make music for him, review all his wonders,
10 Boast of his holy name, let the hearts of those who seek Jehovah be glad.
11 Look to Jehovah and his strength; always be looking for his face.
12 Remember his wonders that he has done, his miracles and the judgments of his mouth,
13 You descendants of his servant Israel, sons of Jacob, his chosen ones.
14 He is our God Jehovah, his judgments run throughout the earth.
15 Forever remember his covenant, the word that he commanded for a thousand years,
16 Which he undertook with Abraham, and Isaac had his oath,
17 And he confirmed it to be a decree for Jacob, a perpetual covenant for Israel,
18 ‘To you I will give Canaan as your definite estate,’
19 When they were few in number, a mere handful, and immigrants in it,
20 And going about from nation to nation, and from a kingdom to another people.
21 He did not let any man deny them justice, but reproved kings on their account,
22 ‘Do not touch my anointed ones nor harm my prophets.’
23 Sing for Jehovah, all the earth!
Tell the good news of his salvation day after day,
24 Tell the tale of his glory among the nations, among all the peoples his wondrous feats,
25 Because Jehovah is great and high-praised, and he is terrible over all gods,
26 For all the peoples’ gods are trumperies, but Jehovah made the skies.
27 Majesty and splendor are before him, strength and glee in the place where he is.
28 Give to Jehovah, clans of peoples, give to Jehovah glory and might!
29 Give to Jehovah the glory that belongs to his name; carry an offering, and come in before him.
Do reverence to Jehovah in stately sacred garb;
30 tremble before him, all the earth, be the world established too, not to be disturbed.
31 Let the heavens be glad and the earth jubilant, and let them say among the nations ‘Jehovah is king!’
32 Let the sea and what fills it thunder, let the fields and everything in them exult,
33 Then let the trees on the rocks shout, before Jehovah, because he has come to judge the earth!
34 Thank Jehovah, because he is good, because his friendship lasts forever,
35 And let them say ‘Save us, God of our salvation, and gather us and deliver us out of the nations, To give thanks to your holy name, to glory in your praise.
36 Blessed be Israel’s God Jehovah from eternity to eternity.’”
And all the people said “Amen” and gave praise to Jehovah.
39 and before Jehovah’s tabernacle at the height in Gibeon
40 Priest Sadok to offer burnt-offerings to Jehovah on the altar of burnt-offering regularly morning and evening, and for everything that is written in Jehovah’s code which he commanded to Israel,
41 and with them Heman and Jeduthun and the remainder of the sifted men who have been specified by name, to give thanks to Jehovah because his friendship lasts forever, 42 and with them trumpets and cymbals for sounding and the instruments for the sacred songs, and Jeduthun’s sons for the gate.
43 And all the people went to their several homes, and David went around to bless his family.
17:1-27
17 And when David had sat down in his house, David said to the prophet Nathan “Here I am living in the cedar house, but the ark of Jehovah’s covenant is under curtains.” 2 And Nathan said to David “Whatever you have in mind do; for God is with you.”
3 But that night God’s word came to Nathan 4 “Go and say to my servant David ‘Says Jehovah, Are you to build me the house to live in? 5 for I have never lived in a house from the day that I brought Israel up until this day, but have been from tent to tent, and from tabernacle.
6 In all my going about in all Israel did I ever speak with one of the judges of Israel whom I commissioned to be shepherds of my people Israel to say “Why have you not built me a cedar house?”’ 7 And now you are to say to my servant David ‘Says Jehovah of Armies, I took you from the pasture, from following the sheep, to be warden over my people Israel, 8 and I was with you wherever you went and exterminated all your enemies before you; and I will make you a name like the names of the great of the earth, 9 and will fix a place for my people Israel and plant them, and they shall dwell in one spot and never be disturbed again, and no longer shall the men of foul play wear them down as they formerly did, 10 ever since the days when I commissioned judges over my people Israel; and I will humble all your enemies, and will make you great; and Jehovah will build a house for you, 11 and when your time is full for going to be with your fathers, I will raise up after you your issue, who shall be a son of yours, and I will establish his kingship.
12 He shall build me a house, and I will make his throne firm forever.
13 I will be father to him and he shall be son to me, and my friendship I will never withdraw from him as I withdrew it from the one that was before you, 14 but I will let him stand in my house and my kingdom forever; and his throne shall be firm forever.’” 15 Just these words, just this vision, Nathan spoke to David.
16 And King David went in and sat down before Jehovah and said “Who am I, Jehovah God, and who are my house, that you have brought me so far as this? 17 And this has seemed to you a little thing too, God, and you have made promises about your servant’s house to distant times, and have viewed me in the aspect of rising men, Jehovah God.
18 What more should David add to you for glory? but you know your servant.
19 Jehovah, for your servant’s sake, and in accordance with your own will, you have done all this great work, to make known all the great things.
20 Jehovah, there is none like you and no God but you, as in everything that we have heard with our ears; 21 and who is like your people Israel, a single nation on earth which God has gone to redeem for a people of his own to make you a name? great and terrible things, driving out nations before your people whom you redeemed out of Egypt, 22 and making your people Israel your own people forever, and you, Jehovah, becoming their own God! 23 And now, Jehovah, let the promise you have given about your servant and his house be sure forever, and do as you have promised, 24 and your name will be sure and great forever, men saying ‘Israel has for its God Jehovah of Armies, Israel’s God,’ and your servant David’s house will be firm before you; 25 because you, my God, have made to your servant the disclosure of building a house for him
this is why your servant, has found it possible to pray before you.
26 And now, Jehovah, you are God, and you have promised for your servant this much good; 27 now you have been willing to bless your servant’s house that it may be forever before you, because you, Jehovah, have blessed, and it is blessed forever.”
18:1-17
18 And after this David defeated the Philistines and humbled them, and took Gath and its dependencies out of the Philistines’ hands.
2 And he defeated the Moabites, and the Moabites became subject to David as tributaries.
3 And David defeated King Hadarʽezer of Sobah at Hamath, when he went to set up his power by the river Euphrates; 4 and David took from him a thousand chariots and seven thousand horsemen and ten thousand footmen, and hamstrung all the chariot ponies, leaving a hundred teams.
5 And the Syrians of Damascus came to help King Hadarʽezer of Sobah; and David killed twenty-two thousand men of the Syrians.
6 And David set up prefects in Damascene Syria, and the Syrians became tributary subjects of David; and Jehovah made David victorious wherever he went.
7 And David took the golden bucklers that were on Hadarʽezer’s officers, and brought them to Jerusalem.
8 And from Tibhath and from Cun, Hadarʽezer’s cities, David took very much bronze; with it Solomon made the bronze sea and the pillars and the bronze vessels.
9 And King Toghu of Hamath heard that David had defeated all the forces of King Hadarʽezer of Sobah, 10 and he sent his son Hadoram to King David to ask how he was doing and to bless him for having fought and beaten Hadarʽezer (for Hadarʽezer was a standing enemy of Toghu), and all sorts of articles of silver and gold and bronze; 11 these too King David dedicated to Jehovah, with the silver and gold that he had carried away from all the nations, Edom and Moab and the ʽBene-Ammon and the Philistines and the ʽAmalekites.
12 And when he came back he defeated the Edomites in Salt Valley, killing eighteen thousand; 13 and he set up prefects in Edom, and all the Edomites became subjects of David; and Jehovah made David victorious wherever he went.
14 And David reigned over all Israel, and did justice and equity for all his people.
15 And Joab the son of Serujah was over the army, and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was private secretary, 16 and Sadok the son of Ahitub and Abimelec the son of Abiathar were priests, and Shausha was secretary for documents, 17 and Benajah the son of Jehojadaʽ was over the Cretans and the Pletans, and David’s first sons were at the king’s side.
19:1-19
19 And after this King Nahash of the Bene-ʽAmmon died, and his son succeeded him.
2 And David thought “I will be friendly to Hanun the son of Nahash, since his father was friendly to me”; and David sent messengers to express sympathy with him at the loss of his father.
3 And David’s officers came to Hanun in the country of the Bene-ʽAmmon to bring him expressions of sympathy; but the chiefs of the Bene-ʽAmmon said to Hanun “Do you think David is honoring your father when he sends you ambassadors of condolence? is it not for the sake of examining and exploring and spying into the country that his officers have come to you?” 4 And Hanun took David’s officers and shaved them and cut off their habiliments in the middle, up to their hams, and sent them off, and off they went.
5 And David was told about the men, and he sent to meet them (for the men were greatly humiliated); and the king said “Stay at Jericho till your beards grow, and then come back.”
6 And the Bene-ʽAmmon saw that they were at deadly feud with David; and Hanun and the Bene-ʽAmmon sent a thousand hundred-weight of silver to hire chariots and cavalry from Mesopotamia and from Maʽacathite Syria and from Sobah, 7 and hired themselves thirty-two thousand chariots and the king of Maʽacah and his people, and they came and camped in front of Medeba; and the Bene-ʽAmmon came together out of their cities and came in for the war.
8 And David heard, and sent Joab with all the force of the champions; 9 and the Bene-ʽAmmon came out and drew up their line of battle at the city gate, and the kings who had come were by themselves in the open.
10 And Joab saw that he had the front of the battle in his front and in his rear; and he made a selection of picked men out of the whole Israelite body, and drew them up to face the Syrians, 11 and the rest of the men he put into the hands of his brother Abshai, and they formed a line to face the Bene-ʽAmmon; 12 and he said “If the Syrians are too strong for me, then you shall be a rescue to me; and if the Bene-ʽAmmon are too strong for you, I will rescue you.
13 Hold fast, and let us do our best for our people and for the cities of our God, and Jehovah will do as he sees fit.” 14 And Joab and the troops that he had with him came on to the attack on the Syrian front, and they fled before him; 15 and the Bene-ʽAmmon saw that the Syrians had fled, and they too fled before his brother Abshai and entered the city.
And Joab came to Jerusalem.
16 And the Syrians saw that they were beaten by the Israelites; and they sent messengers and called out the Syrians beyond the River, with Shophac, Hadarʽezer’s general, at their head.
17 And David was told, and he brought together all the Israelites and crossed the Jordan and came to them and offered them battle.
And David offered battle to the Syrians, and they fought him.
18 And the Syrians fled before the Israelites, and David killed of the Syrians seven thousand chariotry and forty thousand infantry, and struck dead Shophac, the general.
19 And Hadarʽezer’s subjects saw that they were beaten by the Israelites, and made peace with David and became his subjects; and the Syrians were not willing to help the Bene-ʽAmmon any longer.
20:1-8
20 And at the return of the year, at the time when kings go out, Joab led out the militia forces and ravaged the country of the Bene-ʽAmmon and came and laid siege to Rabbah, David remaining in Jerusalem; and Joab conquered Rabbah and demolished it.
2 And David took the crown of Malcam off his head, and found it to weigh a hundredweight of gold; and it had a precious stone in it, which came to be on David’s head.
And he took out the plunder of the city, a very great amount; 3 and the people in it he took out and put them to saws and iron cuts and picks; and so he did with all the cities of the Bene-ʽAmmon.
And David and all the people went back to Jerusalem.
4 And after that there was a war on foot at Gezer with the Philistines; then Sibbecai the Hushathite killed Sippai, of the breed of the ogres, and they were humbled.
5 And there was war with the Philistines again; and Elhanan the son of Jaʽir killed Lahmi the brother of Goliath the Gathite; the shaft of his spear was like a weaver’s pole.
6 And there was war at Gath again; and there was a tall man with fingers and toes by sixes, twenty-four of them, he too was bred of the ogre,
7 who flouted the Israelites, and Jonathan the son of Shimea David’s brother killed him.
8 These were bred of the ogre at Gath, and fell by the hands of David and of his soldiers.
21:1-30
21 And a Satan stood up against Israel and instigated David to count Israel.
2 And David said to Joab and the captains of the people “Go enumerate Israel from Dan to Beer-Shebaʽ and bring me the result, so that I may know the number of them.” 3 And Joab said “Jehovah make the people a hundred times as many again! is my lord not the king? my lord has all of them for subjects
why should my lord call for this? why should it bring guilt on Israel?” 4 But David’s word overbore Joab, and Joab went out and went back and forth throughout Israel, and came in to Jerusalem.
5 And Joab gave the count of the census to the king; and all Israel came to eleven hundred thousand fighting men, and Judah to four hundred and seventy thousand fighting men.
6 But Levi and Benjamin he did not count in among them, because the king’s word was abhorrent to Joab.
7 And God disliked this thing, and struck at Israel.
8 And David said to God “I was very wrong in doing this thing; now set your servant’s offense aside, for I did very foolishly.” 9 And Jehovah spoke to Gad, David’s seer, saying 10 “Go and speak to David, telling him ‘Says Jehovah, I make you three offers; choose one of these and have me do it to you.’” 11 And Gad came to David and said to him “Says Jehovah, Take your option, 12 either three years of famine or three months of being in flight before your foes, your enemy’s sword coming up with you, or three days of Jehovah’s sword and pestilence in the country and Jehovah’s angel ravaging throughout Israel’s territory.
Now see what answer I shall return to the one who sent me.” 13 And David said to Gad “It is a very hard case; let me fall into Jehovah’s hands, because he has very great kindliness; let me not fall into men’s hands.”
14 And Jehovah gave a pestilence in Israel, and there fell of Israel seventy thousand men.
15 And God sent an angel to Jerusalem to ravage it; but when he was ravaging Jehovah saw and took the evil to heart and said to the ravaging angel “That will do; now hold your hand.”
And the angel of Jehovah was standing by Ornan the Jebusite’s threshing-floor; 16 and David raised his eyes and saw the angel of Jehovah standing between the earth and the sky with his drawn sword in his hand stretched out over Jerusalem, and David and the elders, with sackcloths for covering, threw themselves down on their faces.
17 And David said to God “It was I, was it not, that ordered the people counted, and I was the one who sinned and did evil, and these are the sheep; what have they done? my God Jehovah, let your hand be on me and my family, but on your people not for havoc.”
18 And Jehovah’s angel told Gad to tell David that David should go up to erect an altar to Jehovah on Ornan the Jebusite’s threshing-floor; 19 and David went up at Gad’s word which he spoke in Jehovah’s name.
20 And Ornan turned back and saw the angel, and his four sons with him were hiding themselves, but Ornan was threshing wheat.
21 And David came where Ornan was; and Ornan looked and saw David, and came out from the threshing-floor and did reverence to David with his face to the ground.
22 And David said to Ornan “Give me the site of the threshing-floor to build an altar to Jehovah on
give it to me for full money
to have the deaths among the people shut off.” 23 And Ornan said to David “Take it, and your majesty may do what you think best; see, I give you the cattle for the offerings and the threshing-boards for fuel and the wheat for the meal-offering; I give you all.” 24 But King David said to Ornan “No, I will buy it for full money, and not pick up what is yours for Jehovah and offer a burnt-offering that costs nothing”; 25 and David gave Ornan for the site six hundred shekels of gold by weight.
26 And David built an altar to Jehovah there, and offered burnt-offerings and welfare-sacrifices, and called to Jehovah, and he answered him with fire out of the sky upon the altar of burnt-offering, and it consumed the burnt-offering.
27 And Jehovah gave the angel word, and he sheathed his sword.
28 At that time, when David saw that Jehovah had answered him on Ornan the Jebusite’s threshing-floor, he sacrificed there 29 (though Jehovah’s tabernacle which Moses made was at that time at the height in Gibeon; 30 but David could not go before it to invoke God because he was terrorized by the sword of Jehovah’s angel);
22:1-19
22 and David said “This is the house of Jehovah God, and this the altar for burnt-offering for Israel.” 2 And David ordered the immigrants in the country of Israel collected, and appointed stonecutters to cut dressed stones for building the house of God; 3 and David got ready iron in large quantity for the nails for the gates and for the cramps, and bronze in quantity beyond weighing, 4 and cedar timber beyond counting; for the Sidonians and Tyrians brought David cedar timber in great quantity.
5 And David thought “My son Solomon is an immature boy, and the house to be built for Jehovah is to be made surpassingly great for name and fame to all countries: let me make preparations for it”; and David made preparations in great quantities before his death, 6 and called his son Solomon and commanded him to build a house for Israel’s God Jehovah.
7 And David said to his son Solomon
“I had it in mind myself to build a house for the name of my God Jehovah; 8 but Jehovah’s word came to me ‘You have shed blood in great quantities and waged great wars; you shall not build a house for my name, because you have poured much blood on the earth before me.
9 Here is a son being born to you; he shall be a restful man, and I will give him rest from all his enemies on every side; for his name shall be Solomon, “Peaceman,” and I will give peace and quiet over Israel in his time.
10 He shall build a house for my name, and he shall be son to me and I will be father to him, and I will set the throne of his kingship firm over Israel forever.’
11 “Now, my son, Jehovah be with you, and may you prosper and build the house of your God Jehovah as he predicted it of you.
12 Only may Jehovah give you good sense and discernment and his commission for Israel and that you may observe the instructions of your God Jehovah; 13 then will you prosper, if you take care to live up to the usages and laws which Jehovah charged Moses with for Israel.
Courage, and do your best; do not be afraid nor dismayed.
14 And here with my scanty means I have got ready for Jehovah’s house five thousand tons of gold and fifty thousand tons of silver, and bronze and iron left unweighed because they were in such quantities; and I have got ready timber and stones, and you will add to them.
15 And you have about you a great body of skilled labor, quarrymen and stonecutters and carpenters and men with all kinds of skill in all kinds of work 16 in gold, silver, and bronze and iron, beyond counting.
Up and to work, and Jehovah be with you!”
17 And David charged all the princes of Israel to help his son Solomon: 18 “you have your God Jehovah with you, and he has given you rest on every side, because he gave the inhabitants of the country into my hands and the country is subjugated before Jehovah and before his people.
19 Now put your hearts and souls into invoking your God Jehovah, and stand up and build the sanctuary of your God Jehovah, to bring in the ark of Jehovah’s covenant and the vessels consecrated to God into the house that is built for Jehovah’s name.”
23:1-32
23 And David grew old, had lived as long as he wanted to, and he made his son Solomon king over Israel.
2 And he brought together all the princes of Israel, and the priests and the Levites.
3 And the Levites were counted, from thirty years old up; and the number of them poll by poll, of men, was thirty-eight thousand.
4 Of these, to direct the work on Jehovah’s house there were twenty-four thousand, and marshals and judges six thousand, 5 and four thousand gatemen, and four thousand praising Jehovah “with the instruments I made for praising.”
6 And David arranged them in divisions by Levi’s sons, Gershon, Kehath, and Merari:
7 Of the Gershonites, Laghdan and Shimei.
8 Laghdan’s sons, Jehiel the head, and Zetham and Joel, three.
9 Shimei’s sons, Shelomith and Haziel and Haran, three.
These were Laghdan’s heads of families.
10 And Shimei’s sons, Jahath, Ziza, and Jeghush and Beriʽah; these were Shimei’s sons, four.
11 And Jahath was the head and Ziza the second; and Jeghush and Beriʽah did not have many children, and became a family for one assignment.
12 The sons of Kehath were ʽAmram, Ishar, Hebron, and ʽUzziel, four.
13 The sons of ʽAmram were Aaron and Moses; and Aaron was set apart to be consecrated holiest of the holy, he and his sons forever, to burn incense before Jehovah, to wait on him, and to bless in his name, forever, 14 but the sons of Moses the man of God went under the name of the tribe of Levi.
15 The sons of Moses were Gershom and Eliʽezer.
16 The sons of Gershom were Shubael the head; and the sons of Eliʽezer were Rehabiah the head; 17 and Eliʽezer had no other sons, but Rehabiah’s sons were uncommonly numerous.
18 The sons of Ishar were Shelomith the head.
19 The sons of Hebron were Jerijah the head, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, and Jekameam the fourth.
20 The sons of ʽUzziel were Micah the head and Isshijah the second.
21 The sons of Merari were Mahli and Mushi.
The sons of Mahli were Eleazar and Kish.
22 And Eleazar died having no sons but daughters, whom the sons of their brother Kish married.
23 The sons of Mushi were Mahli and Gheder and Jeremoth, three.
24 These were the sons of Levi by their families, heads of families by their muster in number of names poll by poll, doing the work for the service of Jehovah’s house from twenty years old up.
25 For David thought “Israel’s God Jehovah has given his people rest and taken up his abode in Jerusalem forever, 26 and neither will the Levites have to carry the tabernacle and all the vessels for its service.” 27 (For by David’s last words they, the count of the sons of Levi, were from twenty years old up.) 28 For their station was at the side of the sons of Aaron for the service of Jehovah’s house, over the courts and the vestries and cleansing for every sacred purpose, and the doing of the service of God’s house 29 as to the stacked bread and the farina for the meal-offering and for the sheet-matzoth and for the griddle and for the beaten dish, and as to all measures of capacity and of length, 30 and to stand morning by morning to give thanks and praise to Jehovah, and the same for evening 31 and for all presentations of burnt-offerings to Jehovah, for the sabbaths, the new moons, and the annual dates, by number in accordance with the law for them, regularly before Jehovah; 32 and they were to do the duties for the Tent of Meeting and for the sacred things and for their brothers the sons of Aaron as to the service of God’s house.
24:1-31
24 And the sons of Aaron had their divisions.
Aaron’s sons were Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar; 2 but Nadab and Abihu died before their father and had no sons, and Eleazar and Ithamar took the priesthood.
3 And David, and Sadok of the sons of Eleazar, and Ahimelec of the sons of Ithamar, divided them for their assignments in their service; 4 and the sons of Eleazar were found more numerous by heads of men than the sons of Ithamar, and they made the divisions of them, for the sons of Eleazar sixteen heads by families, and for the sons of Ithamar by their families eight.
5 And they divided them by lot, these with those, for there were princes of sacred ritual and princes of God from the sons of Eleazar and from the sons of Ithamar; 6 and Secretary Shemaʽiah the son of Nethaneel, of the Levites, wrote them down before the king and the princes and Priest Sadok and Ahimelec the son of Abiathar and the heads of families of the priests and of the Levites; one family was taken for Eleazar and one taken for Ithamar.
7 And the first lot came out for Jehojarib, for Jedaʽiah the second, 8 for Harim the third, for Seʽorim the fourth, 9 for Malkijah the fifth, for Mijamin the sixth, 10 for Hakkos the seventh, for Abijah the eighth, 11 for Jeshuaʽ the ninth, for Shecaniah the tenth, 12 for Eljashib the eleventh, for Jakim the twelfth, 13 for Huppah the thirteenth, for Ishbaal the fourteenth, 14 for Bilgah the fifteenth, for Immer the sixteenth, 15 for Hezir the seventeenth, for Happisses the eighteenth, 16 for Pethahiah the nineteenth, for Jehezkel the twentieth, 17 for Jakin the twenty-first, for Gamul the twenty-second, 18 for Delajah the twenty-third, for Maʽaziah the twenty-fourth.
19 These were their assignments for their service, to go into God’s house in accordance with the law received for them through their father Aaron, as Israel’s God Jehovah gave him the order.
20 And of the rest of the sons of Levi: of the sons of ʽAmram, Shubael; of the sons of Shubael, Jehdejah; of Rehabiah, 21 of the sons of Rehabiah, the chief, Isshijah. 22 Of Ishar, Shelomoth; of the sons of Shelomoth, Jahath.
23 And the sons of Hebron, Jerijah the chief, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, Jekemeam the fourth.
24 The sons of ʽUzziel, Micah; of the sons of Micah, Shamir; 25 Micah’s brother, Isshijah; of the sons of Isshijah, Zecariah.
26 The sons of Merari, Mahli and Mushi; the sons of his son Jaʽazijah; 27 and the sons of Merari by his son Jaʽazijah, Shoham and Zaccur and ʽIbri; 28 of Mahli, Eleazar, but he did not have sons; 29 of Kish, the sons of Kish, Jerahmeel; 30 and the sons of Mushi, Mahli and Gheder and Jerimoth.
These were the sons of the Levites by their families.
31 They too cast lots along with their brothers the sons of Aaron before King David and Sadok and Ahimelec and the heads of the families of the priests and of the Levites, the chief’s families along with his youngest brother.
25:1-31
25 And David and the generals set apart for service the sons of Asaph and Heman and Jeduthun, those who played impromptu on lyres and harps and cymbals.
And the number of them, the specialists by their service, was, 2 of the sons of Asaph, Zaccur and Joseph and Nethaniah and Asarelah, the sons of Asaph, under the direction of Asaph who composed under the direction of the king; 3 of Jeduthun, the sons of Jeduthun, Gedaliah and Seri and Isaiah, Hashabiah and Mattithiah, six, under the direction of their father Jeduthun on the lyre, who composed for thanks and praise to Jehovah; 4 of Heman, the sons of Heman, Bukkijah, Mattaniah, ʽUzziel, Shebuel, and Jerimoth, Hananiah, Hanani, Eliatha, Giddalti, and Romamti-ʽEzer, Joshbekashah, Mallothi, Hothir, Mahazioth.
5 All these were sons of Heman, the king’s seer in divine matters; to lift his horn high God gave Heman fourteen sons and three daughters.
6 All these were under their father’s direction in the singing of Jehovah’s house, with cymbals, harps, and lyres for the service of God’s house, under the direction of the king, Asaph and Jeduthun and Heman.
7 And the number of them, with their brothers who were taught to sing for Jehovah, all the experts, was two hundred and eighty-eight.
8 And they cast lots for duty on the principle of small and great alike, expert with pupil.
9 The first lot came out for Asaph, for Joseph, his sons, and his brothers, twelve; for Gedaliah the second, him and his brothers and his sons, twelve; 10 the third for Zaccur, his sons, and his brothers, twelve; 11 the fourth for Isri, his sons, and his brothers, twelve; 12 the fifth for Nethaniah, his sons, and his brothers, twelve; 13 the sixth for Bukkijah, his sons, and his brothers, twelve; 14 the seventh for Jesarelah, his sons, and his brothers, twelve; 15 the eighth for Isaiah, his sons, and his brothers, twelve; 16 the ninth for Mattaniah, his sons, and his brothers, twelve; 17 the tenth for Shimei, his sons, and his brothers, twelve; 18 the eleventh for ʽAzarel, his sons, and his brothers, twelve; 19 the twelfth for Hashabiah, his sons, and his brothers, twelve; 20 the thirteenth for Shubael, his sons, and his brothers, twelve; 21 the fourteenth for Mattithiah, his sons, and his brothers, twelve; 22 the fifteenth for Jeremoth, his sons, and his brothers, twelve; 23 the sixteenth for Hananiah, his sons, and his brothers, twelve; 24 the seventeenth for Joshbekashah, his sons, and his brothers, twelve; 25 the eighteenth for Hanani, his sons, and his brothers, twelve; 26 the nineteenth for Mallothi, his sons, and his brothers, twelve; 27 the twentieth for Elijathah, his sons, and his brothers, twelve; 28 the twenty-first for Hothir, his sons, and his brothers, twelve; 29 the twenty-second for Giddalti, his sons, and his brothers, twelve; 30 the twenty-third for Mahazioth, his sons, and his brothers, twelve; 31 the twenty-fourth for Romamti-ʽEzer, his sons, and his brothers, twelve.
26 As to divisions of gatemen: of the Korahites, Meshelemiah the son of Kore, of the sons of Abiasaph; 2 and Meshelemiah had sons, Zecariah the eldest, Jediʽael the second, Zebadiah the third, Jathniel the fourth, 3 ʽElam the fifth, Jehohanan the sixth, Eljehoʽenai the seventh.
4 And ʽObed-Edom had sons, Shemaʽiah the eldest, Jehozabad the second, Joah the third, and Sacar the fourth and Nethaneel the fifth, 5 ʽAmmiel the sixth, Issacar the seventh, Peʽullethai the eighth, because God had blessed him.
6 And his son Shemaʽiah had sons born to him; they were rulers of their family because they were stalwart men; 7 Shemaʽiah’s sons were Ghothni and Rephael and ʽObed, Elzabad, his brothers, stalwart men, Elihu and Semakiah.
8 All these were sons of ʽObed-Edom, they and their sons and brothers, stalwart men with powers for service, sixty-two of ʽObed-Edom’s.
9 And Meshelemiah had sons and brothers, stalwart men, eighteen of them.
10 And Hosah, of the sons of Merari, had sons, Shimri the chief (for he was not eldest, but his father made him chief), 11 Hilkijah the second, Tebaliah the third, Zecariah the fourth; all sons and brothers of Hosah’s, thirteen.
12 Of these there were the courses of the gatemen by heads of men, duties parallel to those of their brothers, to officiate in Jehovah’s house; 13 and they cast lots, small and great alike by families, for each gate.
14 And the eastward lot fell for Shelemiah; and his son Zecariah was a shrewd adviser; they cast lots, and his lot came out northward.
15 For ʽObed-Edom southward, and for his sons, the storehouse.
16 And for Hosah to the west, with the throwing-gate at the highway up the slope. Guard by guard, 17 to the east six a day, to the north four a day, to the south four a day and two each for the stores; 18 at the addition to the west, four to the highway, two to the addition.
19 These were the divisions of the gatemen, of the sons of the Korahites and of the sons of Merari.
20 And their brother Levites over the storages of God’s house and for the storages of the sacred things: 21 the sons of Laghdan, the sons of the Gershonites by Laghdan, the heads of families of Laghdan the Gershonite, Jehielites; 22 the sons of Jehiel, Zetham and his brother Joel, were over the storages of Jehovah’s house.
23 Of the ʽAmramites, of the Isharites, of the Hebronites, of the ʽUzzielites, 24 Shebuel the son of Gershom the son of Moses was warden over the storages; 25 and his brothers by Eliʽezer, his son Rehabiah and his son Isaiah and his son Joram and his son Zicri and his son Shelomith.
26 He, Shelomith, and his brothers were over all the storages of the sacred things which King David and the heads of families of the captains of thousands and of hundreds and the generals had dedicated; 27 out of the wars and out of the booty they had dedicated them for keeping up Jehovah’s house; 28 and all that Samuel the seer had dedicated, and Saul the son of Kish and Abner the son of Ner and Joab the son of Serujah, everyone who had dedicated, was under the hands of Shelomith and his brothers.
29 Of the Isharites, Conaniah and his sons were for the outside business, over Israel as marshals and as judges.
30 Of the Hebronites, Hashabiah and his brothers, seventeen hundred stalwart men, were in charge of all Israel on the west side of the Jordan for all business of Jehovah’s and for the king’s service.
31 Of the Hebronites Jerijah was the chief; the Hebronites, line by line, by families, were investigated in the year forty of David’s reign, and there were found among them first-class men at Jaʽzer in Gilead; 32 and of his brothers there were twenty-seven hundred stalwart men, heads of families; and King David put them in charge of the Reubenites and the Gadites and the half-tribe of the Manassites for all affairs of God’s and for the king’s affairs.
27:1-34
27 And the sons of Israel by number, the heads of families and the captains of thousands and of hundreds and their marshals who officiated for the king in every matter of the divisions, the one that came in and the one that went out month by month for all the months of the year, one division twenty-four thousand, 2
over the first division for the first month was Ishbaal the son of Zabdiel, and on his division twenty-four thousand; 3 of the sons of Peres, the chief for all the captains of the levies for the first month.
4 And over the second-month division was Dodai the Ahohite; and his division, and Mikloth the warden; and on his division twenty-four thousand.
5 The captain of the third levy for the third month was Benajah the son of High Priest Jehojadaʽ, and on his division twenty-four thousand; 6 that was Benajah the champion of the Thirty and over the Thirty, and his division his son ʽAmmizabad.
7 The fourth, for the fourth month; was Joab’s brother ʽAsahel, and his son Zebadiah after him; and on his division twenty-four thousand.
8 The fifth, for the fifth month, the captain was Shamhuth the Izrahite, and on his division twenty-four thousand.
9 The sixth, for the sixth month, was ʽIra the son of ʽIkkesh the Tekoite, and on his division twenty-four thousand.
10 The seventh, for the seventh month, was Heles the Pelonite, of the sons of Ephraim, and on his division twenty-four thousand.
11 The eighth, for the eighth month, was Sibbecai the Hushathite, of the Zerahites, and on his division twenty-four thousand.
12 The ninth, for the ninth month, was Abiezer the ʽAnathothite, of the Benjamites, and on his division twenty-four thousand.
13 The tenth, for the tenth month, was Maharai the Netophathite, of the Zerahites, and on his division twenty-four thousand.
14 The eleventh, for the eleventh month, was Benajah the Pireathonite, of the sons of Ephraim, and on his division twenty-four thousand.
15 The twelfth, for the twelfth month, was Heldai the Netophathite, of Ghothniel’s, and on his division twenty-four thousand.
16 And over the tribes of Israel: warden for the Reubenites, Eliʽezer the son of Zicri; for the Simeonites, Shephatiah the son of Maʽacah; 17 for the Levites, Hashabiah the son of Kemuel; for Aaron, Sadok; 18 for Judah, Elihu, a brother of David’s; for Issacar, ʽOmri the son of Micael; 19 for Zebulun, Ishmaʽiah the son of ʽObadiah; for Naphtali, Jerimoth the son of ʽAzriel; 20 for the sons of Ephraim, Hosheaʽ the son of ʽAzaziah; for half the tribe of Manasseh, Joel the son of Pedajah; 21 for the half of Manasseh in Gilead, Iddo the son of Zecariah; for Benjamin, Jaʽasiel the son of Abner; 22 for Dan, ʽAzarel the son of Jeroham.
These were the captains of the tribes of Israel.
23 And David did not take the number of them below twenty years old, because Jehovah had said he would make Israel numerous as the stars in the sky.
24 Joab the son of Serujah began to count but did not finish, and for this there was wrath against Israel; and the number did not go into King David’s book of chronicles.
25 And over the royal treasuries was ʽAzmaveth the son of ʽAdiel.
And over the storages in the countryside, in the cities and the villages and the towers, was Jehonathan the son of ʽUzzijah.
26 And over the administrators of the business in the countryside, for the working of the soil, was ʽEzri the son of Kelub.
27 And over the vineyards was Shimei the Ramathite. And over what was in the vineyards, for storages of wine, was Zabdi the Shiphmite.
28 And over the olive-trees and sycamores in the lowlands was Baal-Hanan the Gederite.
And over the storages of oil was Joʽash. 29 And over the cattle that grazed in the Sharon was Shitrai the Sharonite.
And over the cattle in the Vales was Shaphat the son of ʽAdlai. 30 And over the camels was Obil the Ishmaelite.
31 And over the sheep and goats was Jaziz the Hagarite.
All these were King David’s ministers of chattels.
32 And David’s uncle Jehonathan was a counselor, a sagacious and literate man; he and Jehiel the son of Hacmoni were with the king’s sons.
33 And Ahithophel was a counselor of the king’s.
And Hushai the Arkite was the king’s friend. 34 And after Ahithophel, Jehojadaʽ the son of Benajah, and Abiathar.
28:1-21
28 And David assembled all the captains of Israel, the captains of the tribes and the captains of divisions who officiated for the king and the captains of thousands and of hundreds and the king’s ministers for all chattels and stock and his sons with the eunuchs and the champions and every leading man, to Jerusalem.
2 And King David rose to his feet and said
“Hear me, my brothers and my people.
I myself had it in mind to build a house of rest for the ark of Jehovah’s covenant and for the footstool of our God, and I made preparations for building; 3 but God said to me ‘You shall not build a house for my name, because you are a man of wars and have been shedding blood.’ 4 But Israel’s God Jehovah chose me out of all my family to become king over Israel forever, because he chose Judah for warden, and in the house of Judah my family, and among my father’s sons he was pleased to take me to install as king over all Israel.
5 And out of all my sons (for Jehovah gave me many sons) he chose my son Solomon to sit on the throne of Jehovah’s empire over all Israel; 6 and he said to me ‘Your son Solomon, he shall build my house and my courts, because I have chosen him to be son to me and I will be father to him; 7 and I will make his kingship firm forever if he is determined to live up to my commandments and laws as is done at this day.’
8 “And now, before the eyes of all Israel, Jehovah’s assembly, and in the hearing of our God: Observe and study all the commandments of your God Jehovah, in order that you may possess the good country and pass on the inheritance to your sons after you forever! 9 And do you, son Solomon, know your father’s God and serve him with earnest heart and willing soul, because Jehovah examines all hearts and is aware of all the drift of thoughts; if you invoke him he will let you find him, but if you leave him he will repudiate you forevermore.
10 Look out now, because Jehovah has chosen you to build a house for his sanctuary; be resolute and go to work.”
11 And David gave his son Solomon the specifications for the porch and its houses and its treasuries and its roof-chambers and its inner chambers and the housing for the mercy-seat, 12 and the specifications for everything he had been inspired with for the courts of Jehovah’s house and for all the surrounding vestries and for the storages of God’s house and of the sacred things, 13 and for the divisions of the priests and the Levites and for all the care of Jehovah’s house and for all the furnishings of Jehovah’s house: 14 for the gold by weight for the gold for all vessels for each purpose, for all the silver vessels by weight for all vessels for each purpose, 15 and weight for the gold lampstands and their lamps, gold by weight for each stand and its lamps, and for the silver lampstands by weight for a stand and its lamps for the purposes of each stand, 16 and the gold a weight for the stack-tables, for each table, and silver for the silver tables, 17 and the forks and bowls and flagons pure gold, and for the golden stoups by weight for each stoup, and for the silver stoups by weight for each stoup, 18 and for the altar of incense refined gold by weight, and for the model of the chariot, of the cherubs, gold, for those that were to spread out and overarch the ark of Jehovah’s covenant: 19 “all in writing, from Jehovah’s hand, he notified to me, all the execution of the specifications.”
20 And David said to his son Solomon “Courage, put your best foot foremost, and go to work; do not be afraid nor dismayed, for you have with you Jehovah God, my God; he will not neglect you nor abandon you till all the business of the work on Jehovah’s house is finished.
21 And here are the divisions of the priests and the Levites for all the service of the house of God, and in every task you have by you all sorts of volunteers with skill for all sorts of work, and the captains and all the people for all your affairs.”
29:1-30
29 And King David said to all the assembly “My son Solomon, whom God has chosen, is young and tender, and the undertaking is a great one, for the castle is not for human beings but for Jehovah God.
2 And to the utmost of my power I have made ready for the house of my God the gold for the gold and the silver for the silver and the bronze for the bronze work and the iron for the ironwork and the wood for the woodwork, beryls and stones for setting, jet and agate and all sorts of precious stones, and marble in great quantity.
3 And furthermore, in my esteem for the house of my God I have a private fund of silver and gold; I give to the house of my God, over and above all that I have prepared for the sanctuary, 4 three thousand hundredweight of gold out of Ophir gold, and seven thousand hundredweight of refined silver to coat the walls of the houses, 5 for gold for the gold and for silver for the silver and for all work by the artists’ hands.
And who volunteers to make his offering of consecration to Jehovah today?”
6 And the chiefs of families and the chiefs of tribes of Israel and the captains of thousands and of hundreds and the chief administrative officers came forward voluntarily 7 and gave for the work of the house of God gold five thousand hundredweight and twenty-seven hundred ounces, and silver ten thousand hundredweight, and bronze eighteen thousand hundredweight, and iron a hundred thousand hundredweight; 8 and any who had stones in their possession gave them to the stores of God’s house, into the hands of Jehiel the Gershonite.
9 And the people rejoiced over their contribution, because they contributed to Jehovah with all their hearts; and King David too rejoiced greatly.
10 And David blessed Jehovah in the presence of all the assembly; and David said “Blessed be you, Jehovah, God of our father Israel, from age to age.
11 Yours, Jehovah, are greatness and might and magnificence and continuance and majesty, because everything in the heavens and on earth is yours; yours, Jehovah, is empire, and upraising to headship over all; 12 and wealth and state come from before you; and in your hands are power and might, and in your hands it is to give greatness and strength to all.
13 And now, our God, we are thanking you and praising your sublime name
14 for who am I and who are my people, that we should hold power to come forward with gifts like these? for everything comes from you, and it is out of your own hands that we have given to you.
15 For we are visitors and tenants in your presence, as all our fathers were; our lifetime is like a shadow over the earth, and there is nothing to look forward to.
16 Jehovah our God, all this accumulation that we have got ready for building you a house for your holy name comes from your hands, and all belongs to you.
17 And I know, my God, that you probe hearts and approve sincere courses; it was in the sincerity of my heart that I volunteered all these things, and now I see with joy your people who have made their appearance here volunteer their offerings to you.
18 Jehovah, God of our fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, keep this the bent of the thoughts of your people’s hearts forever and hold their hearts firmly toward you; 19 and give my son Solomon a staunch heart to keep your commandments, your lessons, and your rules, and to do all and build the castle I have prepared for.”
20 And David said to all the assembly “Bless your God Jehovah”; and all the assembly blessed their fathers’ God Jehovah, and bowed down and did reverence to Jehovah and to the king; 21 and they made sacrifices to Jehovah and offered burnt-offerings to Jehovah on the day following that, a thousand steers and a thousand rams and a thousand sheep and the libations for them, and sacrifices in great numbers for all Israel, 22 and ate and drank before Jehovah that day with a great merrymaking; and they installed David’s son Solomon as king, and anointed him as warden for Jehovah, and Sadok as priest.
23 And Solomon took his seat on Jehovah’s throne as king in place of his father David, and had good success, and all Israel listened to him.
24 And all the captains and the champions, and also all King David’s sons, gave homage to King Solomon.
25 And Jehovah made Solomon surpassingly great before the eyes of all Israel, and surrounded him with such royal grandeur as no king before him over Israel had had about him.
26 And David the son of Jesse reigned over all Israel.
27 And the time that he reigned over Israel was forty years: at Hebron he reigned seven years and at Jerusalem he reigned thirty-three.
28 And he died at a good old age, having had all he wanted of lifetime and wealth and glory; and his son Solomon succeeded him.
29 And the histories of King David, the earlier and the later, are written in the histories of the seer Samuel and of the prophet Nathan and of the seer Gad, 30 together with all his empire and his prowess and the events that befell to him and to Israel and to all the kingdoms of the different countries.
2 Chronicles
1:1-17
1 And David’s son Solomon took a strong hold on his royal prerogatives; and his God Jehovah was with him and made him surpassingly great.
2 And Solomon gave word to all Israel, to the captains of thousands and of hundreds and to the judges and to every prince of all Israel, the heads of families; 3 and Solomon, and all the assembly with him, went to the height at Gibeon, because that was where Jehovah’s tent of meeting was, which Jehovah’s servant Moses had made in the wilderness; 4 the ark of God, though, David had brought up from Kirjath-Jeʽarim when David made the arrangements for it, for David had pitched a tent for it in Jerusalem.
5 And the bronze altar that Besalel the son of Uri the son of Hur had made was there before Jehovah’s tabernacle; and Solomon and all the assembly visited it, 6 and Solomon made burnt-offerings there on the bronze altar before Jehovah that belonged to the tent of meeting: he offered a thousand burnt-offerings on it.
7 That night God appeared to Solomon and said “Ask for what I am to give you.”
8 And Solomon said to God “You greatly befriended my father David, and have made me king in his place.
9 Now, Jehovah God, let your words with my father David prove true; for you have made me king over a people numerous as the particles of the earth.
10 Now give me wisdom and knowledge that I may go out and in before this people; for who is to judge this great people of yours?”
11 And God said to Solomon “Since you had your mind on this, and did not ask for riches and substance and honors and the lives of those who hate you, and did not ask for long life either, but asked to have wisdom and knowledge that you might judge my people over which I have made you king, 12 the wisdom and knowledge is given to you, and I will give you such riches and substance and honors as the kings before you have not had the like of nor shall there be the like after you.”
13 And Solomon came from the height at Gibeon to Jerusalem from before the tent of meeting, and reigned over Israel.
14 And Solomon amassed chariots and horses, and had fourteen hundred chariots and twelve thousand horses, which he quartered in the chariot cities and at Jerusalem with the king.
15 And the king made silver and gold as plentiful in Jerusalem as stones, and cedar as sycamores in the lowlands.
16 And Solomon’s sources of supply for ponies were Egypt and Kue; the king’s dealers had them from Kue on commission, and used to bring up a chariot out of Egypt for six hundred shekels of silver and a pony for a hundred and fifty; 17 and they were similarly imported through them for all the kings of the Hittites and for the kings of Syria.
2 And Solomon thought of building a house for the name of Jehovah and a house for his own royal residence; 2 and Solomon counted off seventy thousand porters and eighty thousand woodcutters to cut on the mountain, and thirty-two hundred supervisors over them.
3 And Solomon sent word to King Huram of Tyre “As you did by my father David, sending him cedar to build himself a house to live in,
4 here I am building a house for the name of my God Jehovah to dedicate to him for burning aromatic incense before him and for regular stacks of bread and burnt-offerings at morning and at evening, on sabbaths and at new moons and on the annual dates of our God Jehovah; this is Israel’s duty forever.
5 And the house I am building is to be great, because our God is greater than all gods; 6 and who holds power to build a house for him? for the skies and the skies of the skies cannot contain him, and who am I to build a house for him, except to burn incense before him? 7 Now send me a man skilled at working in gold and silver and bronze and iron and purple and crimson and violet, who will know how to execute carvings with the artists I have by me in Judah and in Jerusalem, whom my father David provided.
8 And send me cedar, cypress, and algum from the Lebanon, for I know your subjects know how to cut Lebanon timber; and you will have my subjects there with yours; 9 and there will have to be a great deal of timber got ready for me, because the house I am building is to be great and marvelous.
10 And here for the woodcutters, those who are felling the trees, I am giving wheat as food for your subjects, wheat two hundred thousand bushels and barley two hundred thousand bushels and wine two hundred thousand gallons and oil two hundred thousand gallons.”
11 And King Huram of Tyre said in writing, and sent it to Solomon, “It was because Jehovah loved his people that he put you over them as king.” 12 And Huram said “Blessed be Israel’s God Jehovah who made the sky and the earth, that he gave King David a wise son, a man of good sense and discernment, who should build a house for Jehovah and a house for his own royal residence.
13 Now then, I am sending you an intelligent skilled man, Huram-Abi 14 the son of a Danite woman, whose father was a Tyrian, one who knows how to work in gold and silver, in bronze, in iron, in stone, in wood, in purple, in violet, and in lawn and crimson, and to create designs which shall be proposed to him, with your artists and your father David’s.
15 Now then as to the wheat and barley and oil and wine that my lord spoke of, let him send it to his servants, 16 and we will cut timber from the Lebanon in whatever quantities you need and raft it to Joppa roadstead for you; and you will do the bringing it up to Jerusalem.”
17 And Solomon counted all the immigrant population in Israel, after the count that his father David had taken of them, and there were found to be a hundred and fifty-three thousand and six hundred of them; 18 and he made seventy thousand of them porters, and eighty thousand woodcutters on the mountain, and thirty-six hundred supervisors to keep the people at work.
3 And Solomon began building Jehovah’s house in Jerusalem on Mount Morijah, which had been selected by his father David, David having made preparations on the site, on the threshing-floor of the Jebusite Ornan.
2 And he began building in the second month, in the year four of his reign.
3 And Solomon laid the foundations for building the house of God as follows: the length sixty cubits by the old standard (ninety feet), and width twenty cubits (thirty feet), 4 and the porch on the front of the length, parallel to the width of the house, twenty cubits and the height twenty cubits; and Solomon coated it with pure gold on the inside, 5 and the main house he wainscoted with cypress and lined it with good gold and put on palm trees and chains on it.
6 And he inlaid the house with precious stones for magnificence; and the gold was Parvaim gold.
7 And he lined the house with gold, beams and thresholds and walls and doors, and carved cherubs on the walls.
8 And he made the room for the holiest of the holy, its length along the width of the house twenty cubits and its width twenty cubits, and lined it with good gold, 9 six hundred hundredweight and a weight for thirty-ounce gold nails; and he lined the roof-chambers with gold.
10 And in the room for the holiest of the holy he made two cherubs of identical work and coated them with gold; 11 and the stretch of the cherubs’ wings was twenty cubits, the one wing five cubits touching the wall of the house, and the other wing five cubits touching the wing of the other cherub, 12 and the other cherub’s wing five cubits touching the wall of the house, and the other wing five cubits meeting the wing of the other cherub; 13 these cherubs’ wings spread twenty cubits, and they stood on their feet with their faces to the house.
14 And he made the veil of violet and purple and crimson and lawn, and put on cherubs on it.
15 And he made before the house two pillars fifty feet long, and the finial on top, seven and a half feet; 16 and he made chains on the collar and put on top of the pillars, and made a hundred pomegranates and put them on the chains, 17 and set the pillars up in front of the temple, one to the right and one to the left, and named the right-hand one Jakin and the left-hand one Boaz.
4 And he made a bronze altar thirty feet long and thirty feet wide and fifteen feet high.
2 And he made the sea, a casting fifteen feet from lip to lip, circular in outline, seven and a half feet high and forty-five feet in girth; 3 and representations of cattle all round it underneath, fifteen feet, encircling the sea; the cattle were in two rows, cast in one piece with it.
4 It stood on twelve cattle, three facing north and three facing west and three facing south and three facing east, with the sea up on top of them, and their hinder parts all inward.
5 And it was three inches thick, with its lip made like the lip of a cup, a lily-bud; it held thirty thousand gallons.
6 And he made ten lavers, and put five on the right and five on the left, to wash in; they were to rinse the work for the burnt-offering in them; and the sea was for the priests to wash in.
7 And he made the golden lampstands, ten of them in proper fashion, and put them in the temple, five on the right and five on the left.
8 And he made ten tables, and set them in the temple, five on the right and five on the left. And he made a hundred golden bowls.
9 And he made the priests’ court and the large precinct, and doors for the precinct, and coated their leaves with bronze.
10 And the sea he put east of the southeast corner.
11 And Huram made the pots and the shovels and the bowls; and Huram finished doing all the work he did for King Solomon in Jehovah’s house: 12 two pillars, and the globes and capitals on top of the pillars, two of them; and the nettings, two of them, to cover the two globes of the capitals on top of the pillars; 13 and the pomegranates, four hundred of them, for the two nettings, two rows of pomegranates to a netting, to cover the two globes of the capitals on top of the pillars; 14 and the stands, ten of them, and the lavers, ten of them, on the stands; 15 the sea, one, and the cattle, twelve of them, under it; 16 and the pots and the shovels and the forks, and all their furnishings, Huram-Abi made for King Solomon for Jehovah’s house in polished bronze.
17 It was in the Pale of the Jordan that the king cast them, in the heavy soil between Succoth and Seredah.
18 And Solomon made all these furnishings in very great quantity
for there were no statistics taken of the weight of the bronze. 19 And Solomon made all the furnishings the house of God had in it, and the golden altar and the tables with the showbread on them, 20 and the lampstands and their lamps to be kept burning in due course before the shrine, solid gold, 21 and the buds and the lamps and the pincers, gold, 22 and the snuffers and the bowls and the pans and the firepans, solid gold, and the hinges of the house, for its inner doors for the holiest of the holy and for the house doors for the nave, gold.
5 And all the work Solomon did on Jehovah’s house was finished; and Solomon brought in his father David’s consecrated articles and put the silver and the gold and all the furnishings in the treasuries of the house of God.
10 There was nothing at all in the ark but the two tablets that Moses put there at Horeb, that Jehovah covenanted with the sons of Israel when they came out of Egypt.
11 And when the priests came out of the holy place (for all the priests that were to be found had hallowed themselves; there was no observing divisions), 12 the Levite singers all of them, Asaph, Heman, Jeduthun, and their sons and their brothers, dressed in lawn, with cymbals and with harps and lyres, stood east of the altar, and with them priests to the number of a hundred and twenty sounding trumpets, 13 and they played in concert, the trumpeters and the singers, giving a single sound of praise and thanksgiving to Jehovah; and as they pealed out the sound with trumpets and cymbals and instruments of song and with praise to Jehovah, “because he is good, because his friendship lasts forever,” the house was filled with the cloud of Jehovah’s house, 14 and the priests could not stand to officiate because of the cloud because Jehovah’s glory had filled the house of God. 2 Chronicles
6:1-42
6 Then Solomon said
“Jehovah has listed to dwell in darkling air;
2 But I have built a hall for you,
An abode for you forever.”
3 And the king turned around and blessed all the assembly of Israel, while all the assembly of Israel stood; 4 and he said “Blessed be Jehovah the God of Israel, who said with his mouth to my father David and has with his hands made it good, 5 ‘Since the day that I brought my people out of Egypt I had not chosen a city out of any of the tribes of Israel for building a house where my name should be, nor chosen a man to be warden over my people Israel; 6 but I have chosen Jerusalem where my name should be, and I have chosen David to be over my people Israel.’ 7 And my father David had in mind to build a house for the name of Jehovah the God of Israel; 8 but Jehovah said to my father David ‘Whereas you had in mind to build a house for my name, you did well to have it in mind; 9 yet you shall not build the house, but your son, who comes out of your loins, he shall build the house for my name.’ 10 And Jehovah has been as good as his word, and I have risen in place of my father David and have taken my seat on the throne of Israel as Jehovah promised, and have built the house for the name of Jehovah the God of Israel, 11 and have placed there the ark where Jehovah’s covenant is, which he made with the sons of Israel.”
12 And he stood before the altar of Jehovah in the presence of all the assembly of Israel, and spread out his hands 13 (for Solomon had made a bronze rostrum, and put it in the middle of the precinct, seven and a half feet long and seven and a half feet wide and four and a half feet high, and he stood on it and knelt down before all the assembly of Israel and spread out his hands to the sky) 14 and said “Jehovah, God of Israel, there is not a God like you in the heavens and on earth, keeping covenant and friendship with your servants who walk before you with all their hearts, 15 seeing you have kept your word with my father David and spoken with your mouth and made good with your hands as this day.
16 And now, Jehovah, God of Israel, keep with your servant my father David your word ‘You shall never be without a man before me who shall sit on the throne of Israel, if only your sons guard their ways, walking by my instructions as you did’; 17 now, Jehovah, God of Israel, let your word to your servant David prove true.
18 “But will God really live with men on earth? why, the skies and the skies of the skies cannot contain you, much less this house that I have built; 19 but turn to your servant’s prayer and petition, Jehovah my God, listening to the appeal and prayer that your servant is praying before you, 20 that your eyes be open toward this house day and night, toward the place where you have thought to place your name, listening to the prayer that your servant prays toward this place, 21 and that you listen to the petitions of your servant and of your people Israel that they pray toward this place, and that you hear out of your dwelling-place heaven, and, listening, forgive.
22 “If a man does wrong by his neighbor, and he raises a curse on him, cursing him out, and comes and pronounces the curse before your altar in this house, 23 and you hear it out of heaven, act and judge your servants, requiting the knave, sending retribution upon his head, and vindicating the man who stands for his rights, sending to him what he deserves.
24 “And if your people Israel are beaten by an enemy because they sin against you, but they come back and confess your name and pray and beseech before you in this house, 25 and you hear it out of heaven, forgive the sin of your people Israel, and bring them back to the soil you gave to them and to their fathers.
26 “When the sky is barred and there is no rain, because they sin against you, and they pray toward this place and confess your name, coming back from their sin because you afflict them, 27 and you hear it in heaven, forgive the sin of your servants and your people Israel, when you guide them on the good path that they are to walk in, and give rain on your country which you give to your people as a domain.
28 “When famine there is in the country, when pestilence there is, when on the grain there is blasting or mildew, spring grasshoppers, fall grasshoppers, when their enemies beset them in any of their gates, in every calamity, in every malady, 29 whatever prayer or petition any man or all your people Israel may have, each feeling his own blow and pain and spreading out his hands toward this house, 30 and you hearing it out of heaven your dwelling-place, forgive and act and give to each as he deserves, as you know his heart (for you alone know the hearts of mankind), 31 that they may fear you, walking in your ways, all the time they live over the soil you gave their fathers.
32 “And as to the foreigner too, who does not belong to your people Israel, but comes from a distant country drawn by your name (because they will hear of your great name and strong hand and outstretched arm and will come and pray toward this house, 33 and you will hear it out of heaven your dwelling-place), do as the foreigner may call on you to, in order that all the peoples of the earth may know your name, fearing you like your people Israel, and knowing that this house I have built wears your name.
34 “When your people go out to war against their enemies on a course you send them on, and pray to you toward this city which you have chosen and the house I have built for your name, 35 and you hear out of heaven their prayer and petition, do justice for them.
36 When they sin against you (for there is no man who does not sin) and you are angry with them and give them to be defeated before an enemy, and their captors carry them as slaves to a far country or a near, and in the country to which they are carried off 37 they bethink themselves and come back and beseech you in the country of their slavery, saying ‘We have sinned, we have offended and are guilty,’ 38 and come back to you sincerely and wholeheartedly in the country of their captors who carried them off, and pray toward their country that you gave to their fathers and the city you have chosen and the house I have built for your name, 39 and you hear their prayer and petition out of heaven your dwelling-place, do justice for them and forgive your people who have sinned against you.
40 “Now, my God, let your eyes be open and your ears sharpened for prayer at this place.
41 “And now up, Jehovah, to come to your resting-place, you and your ark of might.
Let your priests, Jehovah God, be robed in salvation, and your godly men glad by goodness.
42 Jehovah God, do not refuse to listen to your anointed one; remember the piety of your servant David.”
7:1-22
7 And when Solomon finished praying, the fire came down out of the sky and consumed the burnt-offering and the sacrifices, and Jehovah’s glory filled the house, 2 and the priests could not go into Jehovah’s house because Jehovah’s glory filled Jehovah’s house.
3 And all the sons of Israel saw when the fire and Jehovah’s glory came down on the house, and they bowed down on the pavement with their faces to the ground and did reverence and gave thanks to Jehovah because he is good, because his friendship lasts forever.
4 And the king and all the people were making sacrifices before Jehovah; 5 and King Solomon sacrificed as the sacrifice of horned cattle twenty-two thousand, and sheep and goats a hundred and twenty thousand; and the king and all Israel dedicated the house of God, 6 while the priests stood attending to their duties, and the Levites with the instruments for song to Jehovah which King David had made for giving thanks to Jehovah, because his friendship lasts forever, when David was employing their services in praise, and the priests sounding the trumpets in time with them, and all Israel standing.
7 And Solomon consecrated the middle of the court in front of Jehovah’s house, because there he offered the burnt-offerings and the fats of the welfare-sacrifices, since the bronze altar Solomon had made was not adequate to hold the burnt-offering and the grain-offering and the fats.
8 And Solomon kept the Feast at that time for seven days, and all Israel with him, a very great assembly, from Lebo-Hamath to Egypt Arroyo.
9 And they kept a holiday on the eighth day, because they had been keeping the dedication of the altar seven days and the feast seven days.
10 And on the twenty-third day of the seventh month he dismissed the people to their homes joyous and merry over the good things Jehovah had done for David and Solomon and his people Israel.
11 And Solomon finished Jehovah’s house and the royal palace; and in everything that it came into Solomon’s mind to do in Jehovah’s house and in his own house he had good success.
12 And Jehovah appeared to Solomon in the night and said to him “I have heard your prayer and have chosen this place for myself for a house of sacrifice.
13 In case I bar the sky and there is no rain, or in case I order grasshoppers to eat up the country, or if I let loose a pestilence among my people, 14 and my people who wear my name humble themselves and pray and betake themselves to me and turn back from their bad courses, I will hear out of heaven and forgive their sin and restore the health of their country.
15 My eyes shall now be open and my ears sharpened for prayer at this place.
16 “And now I have chosen this house and made it a sacred place where my name shall forever be; and my eyes and my mind shall always be there.
17 And for yourself, if you walk before me as your father David did, doing just as I have commanded, and keep my usages and laws, 18 I will set up the throne of your kingdom as I covenanted to your father David, ‘You shall never be without a man ruling Israel.’ 19 But if you and the people turn back and abandon my usages and commandments that I have set before you, and go and worship other gods and do them reverence, 20 I will uproot them from the soil I gave them, and this house which I had made a sacred place for my name I will discard and render it a byword and a jeer among all peoples.
21 And this house, which had stood sublime for every passerby, shall lie desolate; and one shall say ‘What did Jehovah do like that to this country and this house for?’ 22 and they will say ‘On account of their having left their fathers’ God Jehovah who had brought them out of Egypt, and taken to other gods and done reverence to them and worshiped them; it was on this account that he brought upon them all this mischief.’”
8 And at the end of twenty years in which Solomon had been building Jehovah’s house and his own house, 2 Solomon fortified the cities which Huram had given to Solomon, and settled the sons of Israel there.
3 And Solomon went to Hamath of Sobah and mastered it, 4 and built Palmyra in the wilderness and all the storage cities that he built in Hamath.
5 And he fortified Upper Beth-Horon and Nether Beth-Horon, cities to stand a siege, with walls and gates and bars, 6 and built Baʽalath and all the storage cities Solomon had, and the chariot cities and the cavalry-horse cities, and all Solomon’s fancies that he took the fancy to build in Jerusalem and in the Lebanon and throughout his dominion.
7 All the people that were left of the Hittites and the Amorites and the Perizzites and the Hivvites and the Jebusites, who were not sons of Israel, 8 of their sons that had been left in the country after them, whom the sons of Israel had not made an end of, Solomon levied as a corvée, which they are to this day.
9 But of the sons of Israel Solomon enslaved none for his work, but they were men of war and the captains of his adjutants and of his chariots and cavalry.
10 And these were King Solomon’s chief commissioners, two hundred and fifty of them who were in authority over the people.
11 And the Pharaoh’s daughter Solomon brought up out of David’s City to the house he built for her, because he said “No wife of mine shall live in the house of King David of Israel, because the premises are hallowed inasmuch as the ark of Jehovah has been into them.”
12 Then Solomon offered burnt-offerings to Jehovah on Jehovah’s altar which he built before the porch; 13 and, each day as was proper for the day, offering them according to Moses’s commandment on the sabbaths and the new moons and the anniversaries three times a year, at the feast of matzoth and at the feast of weeks and at the feast of booths.
14 And he had the divisions of the priests stand for their service in accordance with the ritual of his father David, and the Levites for their duties, singing praises and assisting in concurrence with the priests, giving the daily service each day, and the gatemen by their divisions at each gate, because such was the command of David the man of God; 15 and they did not deviate from the king’s command to the priests and the Levites as to any matter or as to the treasuries.
16 And all Solomon’s work was brought into good condition up to that day, the founding of Jehovah’s house and up to its completion; Jehovah’s house was finished.
17 Then Solomon went to Ghesjon-Geber and to Eloth on the shore of the Red Sea in Edom, 18 and Huram sent him, by his subjects, ships and workingmen familiar with the sea, and they came with Solomon’s subjects to Ophir and fetched from there four hundred and fifty hundredweight of gold and brought it to King Solomon.
9:1-31
9 And the queen of Sheba heard of Solomon, and came to test Solomon with problems at Jerusalem, with an immense retinue and camels carrying spices and gold in large quantity and precious stones; and she came to Solomon and said to him whatever she had in mind to say, 2 and Solomon told her all her points; of not a point was Solomon ignorant so as not to tell her.
3 And the queen of Sheba saw Solomon’s wisdom, and the house he had built, 4 and the food that came to his table, and the order in which his officers sat and his attendants stood, and their costumes, and his cupbearers and their costumes, and the burnt-offering that he used to offer in Jehovah’s house, she had no spirit left in her; 5 and she said to the king “It was a true word that I heard in my own country about your state and your wisdom; 6 and I did not believe their talk till I came and saw with my own eyes, and found that I had not been told half the preeminence of your wisdom; you outdo the report I had heard.
7 Happy are your men, happy these officers of yours who stand before you always and hear your wisdom.
8 Jehovah your God be blessed who was pleased with you for setting on his throne to be king for Jehovah your God; it was because your God loved Israel, to make it stand forever, that he set you over them as king to do justice and right.” 9 And she gave the king sixteen thousand pounds of gold, and spices in great quantity, and precious stones; and there never was the equal of those spices that the queen of Sheba gave King Solomon.
10 (And Huram’s subjects, too, and Solomon’s subjects, who brought gold from Ophir, brought algum wood and precious stones; 11 and the king made the algum wood into passgefloors for Jehovah’s house and the royal palace, and lyres and harps for the singers; and the like had never been seen in Judah.) 12 And King Solomon gave the queen of Sheba everything which pleased her that she asked for, besides what she had brought to the king.
And she turned and went back to her own country, she and her officers.
13 And the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was eighty-seven thousand six hundred and forty pounds, gold, 14 besides the mulcts on travelers; and the merchants brought in, and all the kings of Arabia and the viceroys of the country brought in gold to King Solomon.
15 And King Solomon made two hundred shields of beaten gold, three hundred ounces of beaten gold going on one shield, 16 and three hundred beaten gold bucklers, a hundred and fifty ounces of gold going on one buckler; and the king put them in the Forest-of-Lebanon house.
17 And the king made a great ivory throne, and gilded it with pure gold; 18 and there were six steps to the throne and a footrest in gold, fastened to the throne, and arms on each side of the seat, and two standing lions beside the arms, 19 and twelve standing lions on the six steps, one each side; nothing of the sort had been made for any kingdom.
20 And all King Solomon’s drinking-vessels were gold, and all the vessels of the Forest-of-Lebanon house were solid gold; silver was not thought anything of in Solomon’s days.
21 For the king had ships going to Spain with Huram’s subjects; once in three years the Spain-ships came in, carrying gold and silver, ivory and monkeys and peacocks.
22 And King Solomon surpassed all the kings of the earth in wealth and wisdom; 23 and all the kings of the earth betook themselves to Solomon to listen to his wisdom which God had put into his heart, 24 and brought their presents man by man, articles of silver and of gold and garments, arms, and spices, ponies and mules, a yearly supply.
25 And Solomon had four thousand teams of ponies and chariots, and twelve thousand cavalry horses, which he quartered in the chariot cities and at Jerusalem with the king.
26 And he ruled over all the kings from the River to the country of the Philistines and to the boundary of Egypt.
28 And ponies were exported to Solomon from Egypt and from all countries.
29 And as to the remainder of Solomon’s history, first and last, it is recorded in the history of Nathan the prophet and in the prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite and in the visioning of Jeʽdo the seer against Jeroboam the son of Nebat.
30 And Solomon was king at Jerusalem over all Israel for forty years.
31 And Solomon went to rest with his fathers, and was buried in his father David’s city; and his son Rehoboam succeeded him.
10 And Rehoboam came to Shekem, because all Israel had come to Shekem to install him as king.
2 And when Jeroboam the son of Nebat heard of it (he was in Egypt, as he had fled away from King Solomon) Jeroboam came back from Egypt; 3 and they sent and called him, and Jeroboam and all Israel came and told Rehoboam 4 “Your father made our yoke bear hard on us; now make the hard service to your father rather easier, and his heavy yoke that he put on us, and we will be your subjects.” 5 And he said to them “Come back to me again in three days”; and the people went.
6 And King Rehoboam consulted the old men who had been in the service of his father Solomon when he was alive, asking them “How do you advise me to reply to these people?” 7 and they told him “If you will be kindly to these people and take everything in good part from them and speak them fair, they will be subjects to you permanently.” 8 But he discarded the old men’s policy which they had recommended to him, and consulted the young men who had grown up with him, whom he had in his service, 9 and said to them “What reply do you advise that we give to these people who have told me ‘Make the yoke your father put on us rather easier’?” 10 And the young men who had grown up with him told him “This is what you will say to the people who have told you ‘Your father made our yoke heavy, be easier on us’: you will tell them ‘My little finger is thicker than my father’s hips.
11 Now my father imposed a heavy yoke on you, and I will add to your yoke; my father punished you with whips, and I will with scorpions.’”
12 And Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam on the third day as the king had told them “Come back to me on the third day”; 13 and the king gave them a harsh answer.
And King Rehoboam discarded the old men’s policy 14 and spoke to them in accordance with the young men’s policy, “I will make your yoke heavy and add to it; my father punished you with whips, and I will with scorpions.” 15 And the king did not listen to the people, because it was a crisis determined by God in order that Jehovah might make good his prediction which he had given by Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat.
16 And all Israel saw that the king had not listened to them; and the people replied to the king “What share have we in David? no estate in Jesse’s son; all to your homes, Israel! now look after your own house, David!” and all Israel went to their homes.
17 But over the sons of Israel who lived in the cities of Judah Rehoboam became king.
18 And King Rehoboam sent Hadoram, the superintendent of the corvée; and the sons of Israel stoned him to death.
11 And Rehoboam came to Jerusalem and assembled all the house of Judah and Benjamin, a hundred and eighty thousand picked warriors, to make war with Israel, to restore the kingship to Rehoboam.
2 And Jehovah’s word came to Shema’iah the man of God 3 “Say to Rehoboam the son of Solomon, the king of Judah, and to all Israel in Judah and Benjamin, 4 ‘Says Jehovah, You shall not go up, nor make war with your brothers; go back home; for this thing has come from me.’”
And they listened to Jehovah’s word and turned back from going against Jeroboam.
5 And Rehoboam settled down in Jerusalem, and fortified cities in Judah to stand sieges; 6 and he fortified Bethlehem and ʽEtam and Tekoaʽ 7 and Beth-Sur and Soco and ʽAdullam 8 and Gath and Mareshah and Ziph 9 and Adoraim and Lakish and ʽAzekah 10 and Soreah and Aijalon and Hebron in Judah and Benjamin as guard-cities.
11 And he strengthened the guard-posts and put wardens in them, and stores of food and oil and wine, 12 and in each and every city shields and pikes, and made them very strong indeed, and had Judah and Benjamin for his.
13 And the priests and Levites throughout Israel sided with him out of all their territory; 14 for the Levites left their glebes and property and went to Judah and Jerusalem because Jeroboam and his sons had superseded them from serving as priests to Jehovah, 15 and he had set up priests of his own for the heights and for the satyrs and for the calves he had made.
16 And after them out of all the tribes of Israel those who had given their hearts to looking up Israel’s God Jehovah came to Jerusalem to sacrifice to Jehovah the God of their fathers; 17 and they strengthened the kingdom of Judah and reinforced Rehoboam the son of Solomon for three years, because for three years they went the way of David and Solomon.
18 And Rehoboam married Mahalath, the daughter of David’s son Jerimoth and Abihail the daughter of Jesse’s son Eliab; 19 and she bore him sons, Jeghush and Shemariah and Zaham.
20 And after her he married Maʽacah the daughter of Absalom; and she bore him Abijah and ʽAttai and Ziza and Shelomith.
21 And Rehoboam loved Maʽacah the daughter of Absalom more than any of his wives and concubines; for he took eighteen wives and sixty concubines, and begot twenty-eight sons and sixty daughters.
22 And Rehoboam set Maʽacah’s son Abijah at the head, as warden over his brothers, because he had determined to make him the king; 23 and he disjoined some of all his sons in all the lands of Judah and Benjamin, in all the guard-cities, and gave them provender in plenty and married them to wives.
12:1-16
12 But when Rehoboam’s royal power was firmly established and he had grown strong, he abandoned Jehovah’s instructions, and all Israel with him.
2 And in the year five of King Rehoboam, King Shishak of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, because they had been unfaithful to Jehovah, 3 with twelve hundred chariots and sixty thousand horsemen, and there was no counting the men that came with him from Egypt, Libyans and Sukkites and Nubians; 4 and he took all the guard-cities of Judah and came up to Jerusalem.
5 And the prophet Shemaʽiah came to Rehoboam and the captains of Judah who had come together at Jerusalem for fear of Shishak, and said to them “Says Jehovah, You have left me and so have I left you in Shishak’s hands.” 6 And the captains of Israel and the king humbled themselves and said “Jehovah is in the right.” 7 And when Jehovah saw that they humbled themselves, Jehovah’s word came to Shemaʽiah “They have humbled themselves; I will not make away with them, but will let them have a bare survival, and my ire shall not be poured out on Jerusalem by Shishak.
8 But they shall become subjects to him and know the difference between subjection to me and subjection to the empires of earth.”
9 And King Shishak of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, and took the treasures of Jehovah’s house and of the palace, took everything; and he took the golden shields Solomon had made.
10 And King Rehoboam made bronze shields instead, and committed them to the charge of the captains of the runners who guarded the door of the palace; 11 and as often as the king came to Jehovah’s house the runners came and carried them and took them back to the guard-chamber.
12 But at his humbling himself Jehovah’s anger turned back from him and he did not make away with him outright; and in Judah too there were good points.
13 And King Rehoboam consolidated his power in Jerusalem and reigned on; for Rehoboam was forty-one years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned seventeen years at Jerusalem, the city Jehovah had chosen, to put his name there, out of all the tribes of Israel.
And his mother’s name was Na’amah the ʽAmmonite.
14 And he did what was bad; for he had not made up his mind to devote himself to Jehovah.
15 And as to the history of Rehoboam, first and last, it is recorded in the history of Shemaʽiah the prophet and of ʽIddo the seer for genealogical records.
And the fightings of Rehoboam and Jeroboam went on all the time.
16 And Rehoboam went to rest with his fathers, and was buried in David’s City, and his son Abijah succeeded him.
13:1-22
13 In the year eighteen of King Jeroboam, Abijah became king over Judah; 2 he reigned three years at Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Micajah the daughter of Uriel from Gibeah.
3 And there was war between Abijah and Jeroboam; and Abijah took the offensive with a force of champion warriors, four hundred thousand picked men, and Jeroboam joined battle with him with eight hundred thousand picked stalwart champions.
4 And Abijah stood up on top of Mount Semaraim in the highland of Ephraim, and said
“Listen, Jeroboam and all Israel! 5 You ought to know that Israel’s God Jehovah gave David kingship over Israel forever, to him and to his sons, in a covenant of salt; 6 but Jeroboam the son of Nebat, a subject of David’s son Solomon, stood up and rebelled against his sovereign, 7 and a set of reprobate riffraff gathered about him and organized a mutiny against Solomon’s son Rehoboam, and Rehoboam was young and irresolute and did not hold his own against them.
8 And now you are expecting to hold your own against Jehovah’s kingship in the hands of David’s sons, you being a great crowd and having with you gold calves that Jeroboam made you for gods! 9 Haven’t you banished Jehovah’s priests, the sons of Aaron and the Levites, and made yourselves priests like those of the peoples of all the countries, everybody that comes to get installed with a steer of horned cattle and seven rams and become a priest to no-gods? 10 But we have Jehovah for our God, and have not left him; and priests officiating to Jehovah, the sons of Aaron and the Levites at work 11 and making burnings to Jehovah, burnt-offerings morning by morning and evening by evening, and aromatic incense, and stacked bread on the clean table, and the gold lampstand and its lamps to be lighted evening by evening, because we are keeping the charge of our God Jehovah; but you have left him.
12 And here we have with us at our head God and his priests and the martial trumpets to sound the forward-march over us.
Sons of Israel, do not fight your fathers’ God Jehovah, for you will have no success.”
13 But Jeroboam had sent the ambush around to come in at their rear; and they were in front of Judah, and the ambush at their rear.
14 And Judah faced about and found that they had the attack before and behind; and they cried to Jehovah, and the priests sounded the trumpets, 15 and the men of Judah raised a cheer; and when the men of Judah cheered, God let Jeroboam and all Israel be beaten by Abijah and Judah, 16 and the sons of Israel were routed before Judah, and God gave them into their hands, 17 and Abijah and his people made a great slaughter among them; and there fell, stabbed through, five hundred thousand picked men out of Israel.
18 And the sons of Israel were humbled at that time, and the sons of Judah were nerved up, because they leaned on their fathers’ God Jehovah; 19 and Abijah pursued Jeroboam and took cities from him, Bethel and its dependencies and Jeshanah and its dependencies and ʽEphron and its dependencies.
20 And Jeroboam no longer retained any strength in Abijah’s time; and Jehovah struck him down, and he died.
21 And Abijah consolidated his power, and married fourteen wives and had twenty-two sons and sixteen daughters.
22 And the rest of the history of Abijah, and his courses and his words, are recorded in the story of the prophet ʽIddo.
14 And Abijah went to rest with his fathers, and was buried in David’s City; and his son Asa succeeded him.
In his time the country was quiet ten years, 2 and Asa did what his God Jehovah liked and approved, 3 and cleared out the foreign altars and the heights, and broke up the obelisks and cut down the asherahs, 4 and told Judah to devote themselves to their fathers’ God Jehovah and to live up to his code and commandment; 5 and he cleared out from all the cities of Judah the heights and the hammans; and the kingdom was quiet before him.
6 And he built guard-cities in Judah because the country was quiet and he was involved in no war in those years, because Jehovah had given him rest; 7 and he said to Judah “Let us fortify these cities and enclose them with wall and towers and gates and bars; we still have the country before us, because we have devoted ourselves to our God Jehovah; we devoted ourselves, and he gave us rest on all sides”; and they built and prospered.
8 And Asa had troops carrying shield and pike, three hundred thousand out of Judah, and out of Benjamin two hundred and eighty thousand carrying buckler and bending bow; stalwart champions all these.
9 And Zerah the Nubian came out against them with a million troops and three hundred chariots, and came up to Mareshah; 10 and Asa went out to face them, and they joined battle in the valley north of Mareshah.
11 And Asa called out to his God Jehovah “Jehovah, with you there is no difference for helping between many and the powerless; help us, Jehovah, our God, because we lean on you and in your name we have come against this host.
Jehovah, you are our God; let not a man be a match for you!” 12 And Jehovah let the Nubians be beaten by Asa and Judah; and the Nubians were routed, 13 and Asa and the people he had with him pursued them to Gerar, and so many Nubians fell that they were beyond any rallying, for they were broken up before Jehovah and his army; and they took up a very great quantity of booty, 14 and conquered all the cities around Gerar, because the dread of Jehovah had come upon them, and plundered all the cities, for there was much plunder in them.
15 And they also struck at the stockmen’s tents, and drove off sheep and goats in great numbers, and camels; and they came back to Jerusalem.
15:1-19
15 And God’s spirit came upon ʽAzariah the son of ʽOded, 2 and he went out before Asa and said to him “Hear me, Asa and all Judah and Benjamin: Jehovah is with you when you are with him, and if you go in quest of him he will let himself be found, but if you leave him he will leave you.
3 Israel had a long time of being without the God of truth and without a priest that gave rulings and without a code; 4 but in distress it turned back to Israel’s God Jehovah and looked for him, and he let himself be found.
5 And in those times there was no peace for the goer-out or the comer-in, but great embroilments over all the inhabitants of the countries, 6 and nation clashed with nation and city with city, because God had embroiled them in all distress.
7 But as for you, courage, and do not slacken, because there is to be a reward for your activities.”
8 And when Asa heard these words and the prophecy, he went to work with a will and ousted the disgustments from all the country of Judah and Benjamin and from the cities of the highland of Ephraim that he had captured, and renewed Jehovah’s altar in front of Jehovah’s porch; 9 and he gathered all Judah and Benjamin and those who were living as immigrants with him out of Ephraim and Manasseh and Simeon (for they had come over to him out of Israel in great numbers when they saw that his God Jehovah was with him), 10 and they gathered at Jerusalem at the third new moon in the year fifteen of Asa’s reign, 11 and sacrificed to Jehovah on that day, out of the booty they had brought, seven hundred horned cattle and seven thousand sheep, 12 and entered into covenant to devote themselves to their fathers’ God Jehovah with all their heart and soul, 13 and that anybody who did not devote himself to Israel’s God Jehovah should be put to death, small or great, man or woman; 14 and they swore to Jehovah with loud voice and with cheers and trumpets and ram-horns.
15 And all Judah was glad over the oath, because they had sworn with all their hearts, and with all goodwill they looked for him and he let himself be found; and Jehovah gave them rest on all aides.
16 And King Asa’s mother too he deposed from her queenship because she had made a horror of an asherah; and Asa cut down her horror and reduced it to sawdust and burned it in Kidron Arroyo.
17 But the heights were not removed out of Israel; Asa’s heart, however, was sound all his life.
18 And he brought in his father’s consecrated articles and his own to Jehovah’s house, silver and gold and furnishings.
19 And there was no war up to the year thirty-five of Asa’s reign.
16:1-14
16 In the year thirty-six of Asa’s reign King Baʽasha of Israel came up against Judah and fortified Ramah, blockading King Asa of Judah.
2 And Asa took out silver and gold from the treasuries of Jehovah’s house and the palace and sent them to King Ben-Hadad of Syria, who lived at Damascus, with the message 3 “There is a treaty between you and me, between your father and mine; here I have sent you silver and gold; go break your treaty with King Baʽasha of Israel, so that he will withdraw from his attack on me.” 4 And Ben-Hadad listened to King Asa, and sent his generals against the cities of Israel, and they ravaged ʽIjon and Dan and Abel-Maim and all the storages for the cities of Naphtali; 5 and when Baʽasha heard of it he left off fortifying Ramah and made an end of the measures he was taking, 6 and King Asa took all Judah and they carried away the stone and timber of Ramah, that Baʽasha had built in, and with it he fortified Gebaʽ and Mispah.
7 But at that time the seer Hanani came to King Asa of Judah and said to him “Because you leaned on the king of Syria and not on your God Jehovah, therefore the forces of the king of Syria escaped out of your hands.
8 Did not the Nubians and Libyans constitute a vast force in numbers, in chariots, and in cavalry? but by your leaning on Jehovah he gave them into your hands.
9 For Jehovah’s eyes range through all the earth for working strongly with those whose hearts are sound toward him.
You did foolishly in this: henceforth you have wars on hand.” 10 And Asa was provoked at the seer and put him in the house where the stocks were, in displeasure at him over this.
And Asa persecuted some of the people at that time.
11 And the history of Asa, first and last, is to be found recorded in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.
12 And in the year thirty-nine of his reign Asa was taken with a disease in his legs, which became uncommonly severe; and in his disease too he resorted not to Jehovah but to the doctors.
13 And Asa went to rest with his fathers, and died in the year forty-one of his reign; 14 and they buried him in his grave that he had dug for himself in David’s City, and laid him in a niche which he had filled with spices and specialties concocted by professional pharmacy; and they made a very great burning for him.
17:1-19
17 And his son Jehoshaphat succeeded him, and consolidated his power over Israel.
2 And he put troops in all the fortified cities of Judah, and put prefects in the country of Judah and in the cities of Ephraim which his father Asa had captured.
3 And Jehovah was with Jehoshaphat, because he went along his father’s first courses and did not resort to the Baals 4 but resorted to his father’s God and went by his commandments and not like the doings of Israel.
5 And Jehovah established the royal power firmly in his hands; and all Judah gave tribute to Jehoshaphat, and he had wealth and grandeur in great measure.
6 And his heart went high in Jehovah’s ways, and he made a further clearance of the heights and asherahs out of Judah.
7 And in the year three of his reign he sent his generals, Ben-Hail and ʽObadiah and Zecariah and Nethaneel and Micajah, to teach in the cities of Judah, 8 and with them the Levites Shemaʽiah and Nethaniah and Zebadiah and ʽAsahel and Shemiramoth and Jonathan and Adonijah and Tobijah and Tob-Adonijah, the Levites, and with them Elishamaʽ and Jehoram the priests; 9 and they taught in Judah, having with them the book of Jehovah’s code, and went the rounds throughout the cities of Judah and taught among the people.
10 And the dread of Jehovah came upon all the kingdoms of the countries around Judah, and they did not make war with Jehoshaphat.
11 And some of the Philistines brought Jehoshaphat tribute, silver by the load; the Arabs too brought him sheep and goats, seventy-seven hundred rams and seventy-seven hundred he-goats.
12 And Jehoshaphat grew greater and surpassingly greater, and built fortresses and storage cities in Judah, 13 and had many activities in the cities of Judah and stalwart warriors at Jerusalem.
14 And this is their muster by families: of Judah, captains of thousands, General Ghadnah and with him three hundred thousand stalwart champions, 15 and at his side General Jehohanan and with him two hundred and eighty thousand, 16 and at his side ʽAmasiah the son of Zicri, who volunteered for Jehovah, and with him two hundred thousand stalwart champions; 17 and of Benjamin, Eljadaʽ a stalwart champion, and with him two hundred thousand armed with bow and shield, 18 and at his side Jehozabad and with him a hundred and eighty thousand armed for service.
19 These were the king’s retinue, besides those whom the king put in the fortified cities throughout Judah.
18:1-34
18 And Jehoshaphat had wealth and grandeur in great measure; and he connected himself by marriage with Ahab.
2 And he went down to Ahab to Samaria at the end of some years; and Ahab killed sheep and goats and cattle in great numbers for him and for the people he had with him; and he suggested to him that they go up to Ramoth-Gilead.
3 And King Ahab of Israel said to King Jehoshaphat of Judah “Will you go up to Ramoth-Gilead with me?” and he told him “I am the same as you are, and my people the same as your people; and we are with you for the war.”
4 But Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel “First inquire of Jehovah’s word”; 5 and the king of Israel gathered the prophets, four hundred of them, and said to them “Shall we go against Ramoth-Gilead to war or shall I let it be?” and they said “Go up, and God will give it into your majesty’s hands.”
6 And Jehoshaphat said “Is there not any other prophet of Jehovah here for us to inquire from?” 7 And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat “There is one other man to inquire of Jehovah from, but I hate him because he does not prophesy good luck for me but all the time bad; that is Micajah the son of Imla.”
And Jehoshaphat said “Do not say such things, your majesty.” 8 And the king of Israel called to a eunuch and said “Hurry up with Micajah the son of Imla.” 9 And the king of Israel and King Jehoshaphat of Judah were sitting each on his throne, robed and enthroned on a threshing-floor at the gate of Samaria, with all the prophets under the power before them.
10 And Sidkijah the son of Kenaʽanah made himself iron horns, and said “Says Jehovah, With these you shall gore the Syrians till you have finished them”; 11 and all the prophets prophesied so, “Go up to Ramoth-Gilead and be successful, Jehovah will give it into your majesty’s hands.” 12 And the messenger who went to summon Micajah told him “Here the prophets’ words are unanimously good luck for the king; let your word be like the word of one of them, speak good luck”; 13 but Micajah said “By Jehovah, what Jehovah tells me, that I will speak.”
14 And he came to the king, and the king said to him “Micajah, shall we go to Ramoth-Gilead to war or shall we let it be?” and he said to him “Go up and be successful, they will be given into your hands.” 15 And the king said to him “How many times shall I adjure you not to speak anything at all but truth to me in Jehovah’s name?” 16 And he said “I saw all Israel scattered on the mountains like sheep without a shepherd, and Jehovah said ‘These have no sovereign; let them go home in peace.’”
17 And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat “Did I not tell you he would not prophesy good luck for me but bad?” 18 And he said “Hear Jehovah’s word, then!
I saw Jehovah sitting on his throne, and all the legions of heaven stood by at his right and left, 19 and Jehovah said ‘Who will inveigle Ahab into going up and falling at Ramoth-Gilead?’
And one said this way and another that way; 20 but the Spirit stood out before Jehovah and said ‘I will inveigle him,’ and Jehovah said ‘In what way?’ 21 and it said ‘I will go out and be a spirit of falsehood in the mouths of all his prophets.’
And he said ‘You shall inveigle him and be successful in it; go out and do so.’ 22 Now here has Jehovah put a spirit of falsehood in the mouths of these prophets of yours, but Jehovah proposes bad luck for you.” 23 And Sidkijah the son of Kenaʽanah came up and struck Micajah on the cheek and said “Which way did Jehovah’s spirit pass from me to speak with you?” 24 and Micajah said “You are going to see on that day, you will be getting into a closet to hide.” 25 And the king of Israel said “Take Micajah and take him back to City Captain Amon and Prince Joash 26 and say ‘By order of the king, put this fellow in jail and feed him half rations of bread and water till I come safe back.’” 27 And Micajah said “If you do come back safe, Jehovah did not speak in me.”
And he said “Listen, all peoples.”
28 And the king of Israel and King Jehoshaphat of Judah went up to Ramoth-Gilead; 29 and the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat “I disguise myself and go into the fighting; but do you wear your robes”; and the king of Israel disguised himself and went into the fighting.
30 And the king of Syria had given his chariot-captains the order “Do not attack small or great but only the king of Israel”; 31 and when the chariot-captains saw Jehoshaphat, thinking it was the king of Israel, they surrounded him to attack him; but Jehoshaphat cried out, and Jehovah helped him, and God impelled them away from him, 32 and when the chariot-captains saw that it was not the king of Israel they turned back and left off following him.
33 And a man drew his bow at haphazard and hit the king of Israel between the tassets and the hauberk; and he said to the charioteer “Turn your ponies and take me out of the army, for I am hard hit”; 34 but the fight ran high that day, and the king of Israel was keeping on his feet in the chariot facing the Syrians till evening; and he died at the moment of sunset.
19:1-11
19 And King Jehoshaphat of Judah came back to his house in Jerusalem safe and sound.
2 But the seer Jehu the son of Hanani came out confronting him and said to King Jehoshaphat “Were you to help the wrong-doer and love the haters of Jehovah? for this there is wrath against you from Jehovah.
3 There are good points found about you, though, in that you routed out the asherahs from the country and made up your mind to devote yourself to God.”
4 And Jehoshaphat settled down in Jerusalem and again went out among the people from Beer-Shebaʽ to the highland of Ephraim and turned them back to their fathers’ God Jehovah.
5 And he stationed judges in all the fortified cities of Judah, for each city in the country; 6 and he said to the judges “Look out for what you are doing, because you are not to judge for man but for Jehovah, and he is with you in the business of judging.
7 Now let the dread of Jehovah be on you; act observantly; for with our God Jehovah there are no such things as bad faith and partiality and bribe-taking.” 8 And in Jerusalem too Jehoshaphat stationed some of the Levites and the priests and the heads of families of Israel to give Jehovah’s decision and for the litigation of the inhabitants of Jerusalem; 9 and he gave them the order “You are to do like this: in the fear of Jehovah, in good faith, and with sincere heart.
10 And every litigation that comes before you from your brothers who are seated in their cities, between blood and blood, between ruling and commandment, usages, laws, you are to notify them about, that they may not incur guilt with Jehovah and there be wrath against you and your brothers; thus you are to do, and not incur guilt.
11 And you have Head Priest Amariah over you for every matter of Jehovah’s, and Zebadiah the son of Ishmaʽel, the warden of the house of Judah, for every matter of the king’s; and you have the Levites before you as marshals.
Courage, and go to work; and Jehovah be with the good.”
20:1-37
20 And after this the Bene-Moab and the Bene-ʽAmmon, and with them some of the Meʽunites, came against Jehoshaphat for war.
2 And they came and reported to Jehoshaphat “There has come in against you a great host from the other side of the sea, from Edom, and here they are at Haseson-Tamar” that is, ʽEn-Gedi.
3 And Jehoshaphat was afraid, and turned his face to invoke Jehovah, and proclaimed a fast for all Judah.
4 And Judah gathered to seek from Jehovah; also out of all the cities of Judah they came in to seek Jehovah.
5 And Jehoshaphat stood in the assembly of Judah and Jerusalem at Jehovah’s house, in front of the new court, 6 and said “Jehovah, God of our fathers, is it not true that you are God in heaven and you rule over all the kingdoms of the nations, and in your hands are power and might, and there is no way to stand one’s ground with you? 7 did not you, our God, dispossess the inhabitants of this country before your people Israel and give it forever to the descendants of Abraham who loved you? 8 and they settled in it and have built you in it a sanctuary for your name, saying 9 ‘If there comes upon us disaster, a warfare, a judgment, a pestilence, a famine, we will stand before this house and before you, because your name is in this house, and cry to you out of our distress, and you will hear and save.’ 10 And now here are the sons of ʽAmmon and Moab and the highlands of Seʽir, whom you did not let Israel go in among when they came out of Egypt, for they turned out from them and did not root them out,
11 here are they requiting us by coming in to expel us from our possession which you bestowed on us.
12 Our God, will you not pass judgment on them? for there is no power in us before this great host that is coming against us, and we do not know what to do, but our eyes are upon you.” 13 And all Judah were standing before Jehovah, babies and women and children and all.
14 And Jahaziel the son of Zecariah the son of Benajah the son of Jeiel the son of Mattaniah the Levite, one of the sons of Asaph, had Jehovah’s spirit come upon him in the midst of the assembly; 15 and he said “Listen, all Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem and King Jehoshaphat!
Says Jehovah to you, Be not you afraid nor dismayed at this great host; for the war is not yours but God’s.
16 Go down against them tomorrow; there they are, coming up Flowery Slope, and you will find them at the end of the arroyo, the east face of the wilderness of Jeruel.
17 You do not have to fight on this occasion: take your places, stand still, and see Jehovah’s succor on your side, Judah and Jerusalem.
Do not be afraid nor dismayed; go out tomorrow to confront them, and Jehovah will be with you.” 18 And Jehoshaphat bowed down with his face to the ground, and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem threw themselves down before Jehovah to do reverence to Jehovah, 19 and the Levites, some of the sons of the Kehathites and of the sons of the Korahites, stood up to praise Israel’s God Jehovah’ with loudest voice.
20 And the first thing in the morning they went out to the wilderness of Tekoaʽ; and as they went out Jehoshaphat stood and said “Hear me, Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem: have confidence in your God Jehovah and you will have permanence; have confidence in his prophets and you will have success.” 21 And, after consulting with the people, he stationed singers for Jehovah and praisers of holy grandeur going out before the armed men and saying “Give thanks to Jehovah, because his friendship lasts forever.” 22 And at the moment when they began with carol and praise, Jehovah brought ambushed enemies against the Bene-ʽAmmon, Moab, and the highlanders of Seʽir, and they were beaten; 23 and the Bene-ʽAmmon and Moab stood against the ones from the highland of Seʽir to exterminate them without quarter, and when they had finished with the ones from Seʽir they helped each other to wreck.
24 And Judah came to the lookout toward the wilderness and faced toward the host, and there they were, corpses fallen on the ground and no survivors.
25 And Jehoshaphat and his people went in to plunder the booty and found beasts in great numbers, and chattels and clothing and valuables, and helped themselves to more than they could carry; and they were three days plundering the booty, it was so great.
26 And on the fourth day they assembled in Blessing Vale (because they blessed Jehovah there; that is why they named that place Blessing Vale and it bears the name to this day).
27 And all the men of Judah and Jerusalem came back, with Jehoshaphat at their head, coming back to Jerusalem with festivity because Jehovah had gladdened them by relief from their enemies; 28 and they came into Jerusalem with harps and lyres and trumpets, up to Jehovah’s house.
29 And the dread of God came upon all the kingdoms of the countries when they heard that Jehovah had fought Israel’s enemies.
30 And Jehoshaphat’s kingdom was quiet, and Jehovah gave him rest on all sides.
31 And Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah, being thirty-five years old at his accession to the throne and reigning twenty-five years at Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was ʽAzubah the daughter of Shilhi.
32 And he walked in the path of his father Asa and never turned from it, doing what Jehovah approved; 33 only the heights were not removed, and the people had not directed their hearts to their fathers’ God.
34 And as to the rest of the history of Jehoshaphat, first and last, it is recorded in the history of Jehu the son of Hanani, which was put into the book of the kings of Israel.
35 And later on King Jehoshaphat of Judah associated himself with King Ahaziah of Israel, who had a bad record, 36 and took him as his associate for building ships to go to Spain; and they built ships at Ghesjon-Geber.
37 But Eliʽezer the son of Dodavahu from Mareshah prophesied against Jehoshaphat “As you have associated yourself with Ahaziah, Jehovah has burst your works”; and his ships were wrecked and were not able to go to Spain.
21:1-20
21 And Jehoshaphat went to rest with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in David’s City; and his son Jehoram succeeded him.
2 And he had six brothers, Jehoshaphat’s sons, ʽAzariah and Jehiel and Zecariah and ʽAzariah and Micael and Shephatiah; all these were the sons of King Jehoshaphat of Israel, 3 and their father gave them great gifts in silver and gold and rich objects, with guard-cities in Judah; but the kingship he gave to Jehoram because he was the eldest.
4 And Jehoram came into power over his father’s kingdom and consolidated his power, and killed all his brothers with the sword, and also some of the captains of Israel.
5 Jehoram was thirty-two years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned eight years at Jerusalem.
6 And he followed the path of the kings of Israel, as the family of Ahab did, because he had Ahab’s daughter for his wife; and he did what displeased Jehovah.
7 And Jehovah was not willing to make away with David’s family on account of the pledge he had given to David, and as he had told him he would give him and his sons a lamp through all time.
8 In his time Edom rebelled against the jurisdiction of Judah, and set up a king over themselves; 9 and Jehoram went over with his captains, and all the chariots with him.
And he rose in the night and defeated the Edomites who had surrounded him, and the captains of the chariots; 10 but Edom is in rebellion against the jurisdiction of Judah to this day.
Libnah rebelled then, at that time, against his jurisdiction, because he had left his fathers’ God Jehovah.
11 Also, he made heights among the mountains of Judah, and set the inhabitants of Jerusalem to prostitution and Judah to straying.
12 And there came to him a letter from the prophet Elijah in the words “Says Jehovah, your father David’s God, Whereas you have not followed the paths of your father Jehoshaphat and of King Asa of Judah 13 but have followed the path of the kings of Israel and have set Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to prostitution as the house of Ahab did the like, and have also killed your brothers, your father’s better sons, 14 here is Jehovah bringing a great catastrophe on your people and your sons and your wives and all that belongs to you, 15 and you yourself shall fall into severe sickness by a disease of your bowels till your bowels come out by your sickness, month after month.”
16 And Jehovah roused against Jehoram the spirit of the Philistines and of the Arabs next the Nubians, 17 and they came up into Judah and ripped it open and carried off all the chattels that were to be found belonging to the king’s household, and also his sons and his wives; and he had not a son remaining but Jehoahaz, the youngest of his sons.
18 And after all this Jehovah struck him with an incurable disease in his bowels, and it lasted a long time; 19 and at the time when the end ran out, for two days his bowels were coming out along with his disease, and he died in grievous malady.
And his people did not make a burning for him like the burning for his fathers.
20 He was thirty-two at his accession to the throne, and reigned eight years at Jerusalem, and went a way that gave no satisfaction; and they buried him in David’s City, but not in the tombs of the kings.
22:1-12
22 And the inhabitants of Jerusalem installed his youngest son Ahaziah as his successor, because the invading raiders, the Mazonite Arabs, had killed all the first ones.
And Ahaziah the son of King Jehoram of Judah became king.
2 Ahaziah was twenty-two years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned one year at Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was ʽAthaliah the daughter of ʽOmri.
3 He too followed the paths of the family of Ahab, because his mother was his adviser to do wrong; 4 and he did what displeased Jehovah like the family of Ahab, because he had them as advisers after his father’s death to ruin him; 5 he went by their advice too, and went with Jehoram the son of Ahab, the king of Israel, to war against King Hazael of Syria at Ramoth-Gilead; and the Syrians wounded Joram, 6 and he went back to recover at Jezreʽel from the wounds they had given him at Ramah in his fighting with King Hazael of Syria.
And Ahaziah the son of Jehoram, the king of Judah, went down to see Jehoram the son of Ahab at Jezreʽel, because he was sick 7 (and the trampling down of Ahaziah, for him to come to Joram, was from God), and when he came there he went out with Jehoram to Jehu the son of Nimshi, whom Jehovah had anointed to extirpate the family of Ahab; 8 and as Jehu was prosecuting the case against the family of Ahab he found the captains of Judah and the sons of Ahaziah’s brothers in attendance on Ahaziah, and killed them, 9 and looked for Ahaziah; and they captured Ahaziah (he having gone into hiding in Samaria) and brought him to Jehu, and he put him to death.
And they buried him, because they said “He was the son of Jehoshaphat, who devoted himself to Jehovah with all his heart.”
And Ahaziah’s family could not muster strength to assert the royal power.
10 And Ahaziah’s mother ʽAthaliah saw that her son was dead, and she stood up and destroyed all the royal blood of the house of Judah.
11 But Princess Jehoshabeʽath took Ahaziah’s son Joash and spirited him away from among the princes who were being dispatched, and put him and his nurse in the bedding-closet, and King Jehoram’s daughter Jehoshabeʽath, Priest Jehojadaʽ’s wife, because she was Ahaziah’s sister, concealed him from ʽAthaliah and she did not put him to death.
12 And he was with them in Jehovah’s house in hiding for six years, and ʽAthaliah reigned over the country.
23:1-21
23 And in the seventh year Jehojadaʽ took courageous action and took into his confidence the captains of hundreds, ʽAzariah the son of Jeroham and Ishmaʽel the son of Jehohanan and ʽAzariah the son of ʽObed and Maʽasejah the son of ʽAdajah and Elishaphat the son of Zicri, 2 and they went the rounds in Judah and gathered the Levites out of all the cities of Judah, and the heads of families of Israel; and they came to Jerusalem, 3 and all the assembly made a covenant with the king in the house of God.
And he said to them “Here is the king’s son; he is to be king, in accordance with what Jehovah promised regarding David’s sons.
4 This is the thing you are to do: the third of you priests and Levites that go in on the sabbath, to act as threshold gatemen; 5 and the third, at the royal palace; and the third, at the Foundation Gate; and all the people, in the courts of Jehovah’s house, 6 but let nobody enter Jehovah’s house except the priests and such of the Levites as are on duty; they are to enter, because they are consecrated, but all the people are to keep Jehovah’s charge.
7 And the Levites are to encircle the king on all sides, weapon in hand, and he who comes into the house is to be put to death; and they are to be with the king when he goes in and when he goes out.” 8 And the Levites and all Judah did just as Priest Jehojadaʽ ordered them, and each fetched his men, those who went in on the sabbath with those who came out on the sabbath, because Priest Jehojadaʽ had not let the divisions off.
9 And Priest Jehojadaʽ gave the captains of hundreds the spears and shields and bucklers that had belonged to King David, that were in Jehovah’s house, 10 and had all the people stand weapon in hand from the southeast corner of the house to the northeast corner, for the altar and the house, around the king; 11 and they brought out the prince and put on him the diadem and the Lessons, and declared him king, and Jehojadaʽ and his sons anointed him and said “Long live the king!”
12 And ʽAthaliah heard the voices of the people running and praising the king, and came to the people in Jehovah’s house 13 and saw the scene: there was the king standing by his pillar at the entrance, and the captains and the trumpets beside the king, and all the populace rejoicing and blowing trumpets, and the singers with the instruments for song and giving notice for praise; and ʽAthaliah tore her garments and said “Treason! treason!” 14 And Priest Jehojadaʽ brought out the captains of hundreds, the officers of the forces, and said to them “Let her out inside the cordon, and let anyone that goes in after her be put to the sword”; for the priest said “You are not to put her to death in Jehovah’s house.” 15 And they stood away from her, and she went into the entrance to the driveway gate of the palace, and they put her to death there.
16 And Jehojadaʽ made a covenant between himself and the people and the king that they should be Jehovah’s people.
*p\BEQ/\E51bow\AFw(6"#tw C\EF\ACe\80k\899"\88BD\92 h\DB\E2,4\D9Q\EC/xaDa`t\F5M\84aXuhnvd6\C6R\E5\00a\84\F2\A4oe/},`4[\80/g \C6y\EB\E3t\C9\D6{T\E9\C4$fm 3ai8&\A9/L\F9盔l\E3vo$Ka\F6%\80o\D7ch ei/(\A9a)}0s8fc8BKdk ɾ\C8\E0̖e!8\EB\F4[/t3o\F5\EF oo I\96\E50\98\E9\89Tw Ղe\C5\E22E\B0\CC!}t. n\D5'o\E4t\F1͆tj-ezɐ\A0iyld(`\00drKD~@`i\FBh`n\F5mDv\89\90e\E75h!,\81GrLg@lehD\D1jme*\C6g0\D8\DA\EF\C9-`la\A0\CEE\A5\EAs1\A0et}){)(\F6-\95\8Fl\85\F5i%\8A\92\E7\A0MNc\EDA\C6\DAU\80Qd\A0l\E1\00l\EE&m\8Aebp\B8 
\AA\BB\B1$U<d\88\FD\E3\A0=.*a t\E0e0a\F0\84\E1)nr >n$l\FFn\CEt$G\A8a\D4\00q($\DA'banFie\F2\00i\F4utM'
\E1 i\D1\E0\A0m\80fki͐\B0\C6%\E3\A2Ɛu4\CEaaj\ECkZi\A8R:"oJ/U$\C0>, )Hh$dhctm5\F7,Am\A0re-Eud,\A8a\EEe4th\EF#\93\EB\D5qe!Uied\E7dF\DC\F7l3\A0qb\C40\8A\9CDVhc`\FDkh&6hi\B9Dtw\B4!Tn,\9DEbzmacq`v(c \B3UOrd\BE
bgj?t"o\EEs0
 \8EU\00Ƃu,(u\F1a"~K\96ec\AC\E0\95\A8ni@wl2be\B2$2\F6\9CMyYl\B0ht|\CD$T5w_!u`,ey\FD0yid\EE\D9d\B0Gq6Xa`Iw2k5\8Cf|&\EBpla&k\E1qC \A1rc)2Ne\A2lew\E1\83\CB"\EDd)b%Aw5`N\9Ag0d\96\92%$t\E0෢\88΂\A5!skc
%0Cn\E8,f\B0nd-K\AAad9ʽ0\A5Bd(%IlBn\BF`D-m\80\C2\94\F8ww@a~mM\D3!\E8pdIL}q\FAArg\A0n.jraa@yREl qhe\A0H vadmc\82d/ff\FAiN\C0V(mDt\A0;q.I\D7s`wh
{\A6ind s\E8a\E0kp.àe@\F4 lK0e-\A6mN"6QiNt\89$J\81iisgE!U@\E3b{\F4\A0eNd$\00}\F5\A3i|(\EDb\F0u*\E5(\FFEu\E7r`n`ue +f"z%Iiv!i`\00\D73@jg\F9\D3d*!9\A0\E5\EF 4i8su\E1e"\E1\A0x\F0oo\EC ma`io~2kn \CA\F7\E09!\C1X\E4`J\E7x\F5Wc\8CML ~\DF0cz+Zgyj fi\F21\C2eO\CFtc\A8$d*'()Mp\F7yt)\E1l`0\E7os\E0\80\88\B0s<PFcL|\E1LG34(lg\ABF\A9w@ I\F1vgqlbyfx4\D8e(\FF)l,Ur,\E0s\D5 %x\00i\EEf\A0almbf\A2gDkyqai\FER0iof8e\BD,$\E1=xu\EFy>Q]AvW(h`\F1vw\A5Qld c\B6eUt(7!iv \C4\CEd%dz\E2et a\E9\FET\CCq(sn%wt.\F4(mxHT\A8-\F9La%d"+OIsHet/
\F0P\EB\84\E5\EAw2\D6\F0U:
I\E8kji_q\FA\AC3}hg"vg,ei3~E\E2\88\FDf\A0\F0ha\A9,\EF\FB\E5:$\00Q:d\A2h\E50m`d,0\E4ig4xFa\F3kmls"*nv \CA\E5\ECwOaip\B0\D130\E0\EBxwe-)rm0u\E4l\F0`l5`s#r
px35\A8\A4cu\FEebW _t\BE\B1v\F6\A3!l\E1 ?Tp\CBPl\C6!H17t`Òe\A0d\90u \FE\E8*:3>\00I\AEh!ADterc\8A}H\BF\AF5eqڜ\F2\00\9DS0eea\F2$\00b`d
Wh\E1,\00|(a`jI$\E6$\ECIS`a\EC\C5t(xO\00\F4 e\ED{>:"\F1N\E8"thl\E8
\A5\FA%\C4A\8A\994\BAS \F5?$\00%\E5f\E82`\F3p&\A1=. \F8e(c\D6oG \B8 \E4mve8\F6h\E1 z}Np(E a\EF1"D-d0fM tuli1B\A8\9C\E2q+(/tf\A2\F3l8\E9\F2i [\FDt#t
f\E0\00\C8waoyq\B4\F0\83d\A8d3%lc`%zj\80\EFl_l\F5 \A8``\87\C4\F2\F5D\E3ms\00[AzQYm9 S esiidhvJ\96Ȝ\00K\D5M7(ta\81'\E7jl\89\9C\F0\83e<!\F2\C5Ym(o\F7c &%Ka\81\94e.\88nl46\EB\92a\92o`updF\92e"\E6\E4\98!/:\96\00\FA16ie0uHw\A2tu2\AC(B(<\F1}0Y%!S |xuhra\EB7(nK\F0x\E1K \E3i%U(u~\00\E1s\A0hj7#1e,@`fD\A8\C7a\e\C0Hgw-0\CAqee\E1$a\A8fi\88mt\D4W\E1dE\D9F`ft g%$QNiG\E3Cd\F51ta h|I2\F4hg s@P\E5*\E9nw4\AF"@4\E9e\F8%ople and sent the booty from them to the king of Damascus.
24 For the Syrian forces came in with insignificant numbers, and Jehovah gave very great forces into their hands because they had abandoned their fathers’ God Jehovah; and they executed judgments on Joash.
25 And when they went away from him
for they left him badly hurt
his officers conspired against him for the blood of Priest Jehojadaʽ’s sons, and killed him in his bed; so he died, and they buried him in David’s City but did not bury him in the tombs of the kings.
26 And these are the ones who conspired against him: Zabad the son of an ʽAmmonite woman Shimeath, and Jehozabad the son of a Moabite woman Shimrith.
27 And his sons, and the volume of bodings against him, and the laying of foundations for the house of God, are recorded in the story of the book of the kings.
And his son Amasiah succeeded him.
25:1-28
25 Amasiah was twenty-five years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned twenty-nine years at Jerusalem.
And his mother’s name was Jehoʽaddan, from Jerusalem.
2 And he did what Jehovah approved, only not wholeheartedly.
3 And when he had the kingship firmly in his hands, he killed his officers who had killed the king his father, 4 but their children he did not put to death, but did in accordance with what is written in the code in the book of Moses, that Jehovah commanded “Fathers shall not be put to death for children, nor children for fathers, but each shall be put to death for his own sin.”
5 And Amasiah gathered Judah and ranged them by families under captains of thousands and of hundreds, all Judah and Benjamin, and mustered them from twenty years old up and found them to be three hundred thousand picked men to go out on service, wielding pike and shield.
6 And he hired out of Israel a hundred thousand stalwart champions for a hundred hundredweight of silver; 7 but a man of God came to him and said “Your majesty, let the Israelite levy not come in with you, because Jehovah is not with Israel, all the sons of Ephraim.
8 For if by these you are making up strength for the war, God will give you a stumble before an enemy; for there is power in God to help and to give a stumble.” 9 And Amasiah said to the man of God “And what is to be done for the hundred hundredweight that I have given to the Israelite brigade?” and the man of God said “Jehovah has enough to give you much more than this.” 10 And Amasiah detached the brigade that had come to him out of Ephraim to go to their own place; and they were very angry at Judah, and went back in anger to their place.
11 But Amasiah courageously led his people on and went to Salt Valley and defeated the sons of Seʽir, killing ten thousand; 12 and the sons of Judah took ten thousand prisoners and brought them to the top of the crag and threw them down from the top of the crag, and all of them were battered to pieces.
13 But the men of the brigade that Amasiah turned back from going with him to the war raided the cities of Judah from Samaria to Beth-Horon and killed three thousand out of them and lifted much plunder.
14 And after Amasiah came in from defeating the Edomites he brought in the gods of the sons of Seʽir and set them up for gods for himself and did reverence before them and burned incense to them; 15 and Jehovah was angry with Amasiah and sent a prophet to him, who said to him “Why have you resorted to that people’s gods, who did not deliver their people out of your hands?” 16 But when he spoke to him he told him “Have we made you a royal counselor? leave off, why should you get a beating?” and the prophet left off and said “I know God has a purpose to bring you to grief, because you have done this and not listened to my advice.”
17 And King Amasiah of Judah chose a policy and sent word to Joash the son of Jehoahaz the son of Jehu, the king of Israel, “Come on, let us come face to face.” 18 And King Joash of Israel sent word to King Amasiah of Judah “The brier in the Lebanon sent word to the cedar in the Lebanon ‘Give my son your daughter as wife’; and the wild beasts in the Lebanon came by and trampled the brier.
19 You think, here you have defeated Edom, and you feel confident of gaining glory; now stay at home; why should you challenge trouble, and fall, and Judah with you?” 20 But Amasiah would not listen, because it came from God, to give him into hostile hands, because they had resorted to the Edomite gods; 21 and King Joash of Israel came up, and they came face to face, he and King Amasiah of Judah, at Beth-Shemesh, which belongs to Judah.
22 And the Judahites were beaten by the Israelites, and fled to their homes.
23 And King Joash of Israel captured King Amasiah of Judah, the son of Joash the son of Jehoahaz, at Beth-Shemesh, and brought him to Jerusalem and breached the wall of Jerusalem for two hundred yards, from the Ephraim Gate to the Corner Gate.
24 And he took all the gold and silver, and all the articles that were found in Jehovah’s house with ʽObed-Edom, and the palace treasures, and the hostages, and went back to Samaria.
25 And Amasiah the son of Joash, the king of Judah, lived fifteen years after the death of Joash the son of Jehoahaz, the king of Israel.
26 And as to the rest of the history of Amasiah, first and last, it is recorded in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.
27 And from the time when Amasiah turned off from following Jehovah they went to organizing a revolution against him at Jerusalem; and he fled to Lakish, and they sent to Lakish after him and put him to death there.
28 And they took him away on ponies, and buried him in David’s City with his fathers.
26:1-23
26 And all the people of Judah took ʽUzzijah, who was sixteen years old, and installed him as successor to his father Amasiah.
2 He fortified Eloth, and reannexed it to Judah, after the king had gone to rest with his fathers.
3 ʽUzzijah was sixteen years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned fifty-two years at Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Jecoliah, from Jerusalem.
4 And he did what Jehovah approved, just as his father Amasiah had, 5 and undertook to devote himself to God in the time of Zecariah the director in the fear of God; and during the time that he devoted himself to Jehovah, God gave him prosperity.
6 And he went out and attacked the Philistines, and breached the wall of Gath and the wall of Jabneh and the wall of Ashdod, and built cities in Ashdod and among the Philistines; 7 and God helped him against the Philistines and against the encampment-dwelling Arabs and against the Meʽunites; 8 and the Meʽunites paid tribute to ʽUzzijah; and his prestige reached to the frontier of Egypt, because he showed himself surpassingly strong.
9 And ʽUzzijah built towers in Jerusalem over the Corner Gate and over the Valley Gate and over the angle, and made them strong.
10 And he built towers in the wilderness and cut out many cisterns, because he had much livestock, and in the foothills and on the plain plowmen and vineyardists on the mountainsides and in the vineyards, because he was a lover of the soil.
11 And ʽUzzijah had a war force, men going out on raiding service, by the count of their muster by Secretary Jeiel and Marshal Maʽasejah under the direction of Hananiah one of the king’s captains, 12 total number of heads of families, men of solid fortunes, twenty-six hundred, 13 and under their direction a service force of three hundred and seven thousand and five hundred who warred with stalwart strength to help the king against the enemy; 14 and ʽUzzijah had ready for them, for all the army, shields and pikes and helmets and cuirasses, and slingstones; 15 and he made in Jerusalem newly-invented machines to stand on the towers and on the corners of the wall to shoot bolts and great stones.
And his fame went out to distant parts; for he was marvelously helped till he was strong.
16 But when he was strong his heart went so high that he grew vicious and was unfaithful to his God Jehovah, and went into Jehovah’s temple to burn incense on the altar of incense.
17 And Priest ʽAzariah went in after him, and with him eighty stalwart priests of Jehovah, 18 and opposed King ʽUzzijah and said to him “It does not belong to you, ʽUzzijah, to burn incense to Jehovah, but to the priests, the sons of Aaron, who are consecrated to burn incense: go out of the sanctuary, because you have been unfaithful and Jehovah will not have it redound to your glory.” 19 And ʽUzzijah was displeased, and had a censer in his hand to burn incense; but as he vented his displeasure on the priests, leprosy shot out in his forehead before the priests in Jehovah’s house above the altar of incense, 20 and Chief Priest ʽAzariah and all the priests faced toward him and found him leprous in the forehead, and hurried him out of there; and he of his own accord bolted out because Jehovah had marred him.
21 And King ʽUzzijah was leprous to the day of his death, and lived as a leper in the exempt house because he was sundered from Jehovah’s house, while his son Jotham, as steward of the royal palace, acted as regent.
22 And the rest of the history of ʽUzzijah, first and last, the prophet Isaiah the son of Amos has recorded.
23 And ʽUzzijah went to rest with his fathers, and they buried him with his fathers, in the royal burial-field, because they thought “He is a leper”; and his son Jotham succeeded him.
27:1-9
27 Jotham was twenty-five years old at his accession to the throne, and he reigned sixteen years at Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Jerushah the daughter of Sadok.
2 And he did what Jehovah approved, just as his father ʽUzzijah had; only he did not go into Jehovah’s temple, and the people still acted viciously.
3 He built the upper gate of Jehovah’s house, and did much building on the wall of the castle ridge, 4 and fortified cities in the highland of Judah, and built fortresses and towers on the peaks.
5 And he made war with the king of the Bene-ʽAmmon and mastered them; and the Bene-ʽAmmon gave him in that year a hundred hundredweight of silver and a million bushels of wheat and a million of barley; this indemnity the Bene-ʽAmmon paid him; and in the second year and the third.
6 And Jotham consolidated his power, because he set his courses in order before his God Jehovah.
7 And as to the rest of the history of Jotham, and all his wars and his courses, they are recorded in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.
8 He was twenty-five years old at his accession, and reigned sixteen years at Jerusalem.
9 And Jotham went to rest with his fathers, and they buried him in David’s City; and his son Ahaz succeeded him.
28:1-27
28 Ahaz was twenty years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned sixteen years at Jerusalem.
2 And he did not do what Jehovah approved as his father David had, but followed the paths of the kings of Israel, and even made bronze images for the Baals.
3 And he made burnings in Ben-Hinnom’s Valley, and burned his sons up in the fire, in accordance with the detestable ways of the nations Jehovah dispossessed before the sons of Israel, 4 and sacrificed and made burnings at the heights and on the hills and under every verdant tree.
5 And his God Jehovah gave him into the hands of the king of Syria, and they killed in his country and took a great number of prisoners out of it and brought them to Damascus; and he was also given into the hands of the king of Israel, who killed great numbers in his country.
6 And Pekah the son of Remaliah killed in Judah a hundred and twenty thousand in one day, all stalwart men, for their having abandoned their fathers’ God Jehovah; 7 and the Ephraimite champion Zicri killed the king’s son Maʽasejah and ʽAzrikam the warden of the palace, and Elkanah the prime minister; 8 and the sons of Israel took prisoners from their brothers two hundred thousand, wives and sons and daughters, and also plundered much booty from them, and brought the booty to Samaria.
9 But there was there a prophet of Jehovah named ʽOded, and he went out to confront the army that was coming to Samaria and said to them “Here it has been by the ire of your fathers’ God Jehovah against Judah that he has given them into your hands and you have been killing among them in an irritation that reached to the sky.
10 And now you are thinking of reducing the sons of Judah and Jerusalem to be slaves to you; do not you yourselves decidedly have your own guilts against your God Jehovah? 11 Now listen to me and send back the prisoners you have brought that are brothers of yours; for there is anger of Jehovah’s against you.”
12 And some of the heads of the sons of Ephraim, ʽAzariah the son of Jehohanan and Berekiah the son of Meshillemoth and Jehizkiah the son of Shallum and ʽAmasa the son of Hadlai, stood up against those who were coming from the expedition 13 and said to them “You shall not bring the prisoners in here; for it is by way of laying upon us guilt against Jehovah that you are thinking of adding to our sins and our guilts; for we have too much guilt, and there is anger against Israel.”
14 And the armed force left the prisoners and the plunder before the generals and all the assembly; 15 and the men named above stood up and took the prisoners in hand, and clothed out of the booty all nakedness of theirs, and furnished them clothing and sandals and food and drink and oil to rub on, and brought them along, with donkeys for everybody who was breaking down, and brought them to Jericho the City of Palms alongside their brothers, and went back to Samaria.
16 At that time King Ahaz sent to the king of Assyria to help him, 17 the Edomites having made another invasion and killed in Judah and carried off prisoners for slaves, 18 and the Philistines having raided among Judah’s lowland and southern cities and captured Beth-Shemesh and Aijalon and Gederoth and Soco and its dependencies and Timnah and its dependencies and Gimzo and its dependencies and settled in them; 19 for Jehovah had humbled Judah on account of King Ahaz of Israel because he had been a demoralizing influence in Judah and had been unfaithful to Jehovah.
20 But King Tiglath-Pilneser of Assyria came against him and harassed him, and did not strengthen him; 21 for Ahaz despoiled Jehovah’s house and the royal palace and the generals, and gave to the king of Assyria, but it was no help to him.
22 And at the time he was harassed he was additionally unfaithful to Jehovah that was King Ahaz
23 and sacrificed to the gods of Damascus that had inflicted blows on him, thinking “Because the gods of the kings of Syria give them help, I will sacrifice to them and they shall help me”; and they served to bring him to his fall, him and all Israel.
24 And Ahaz got together the vessels of the house of God, and mutilated the vessels of the house of God, and shut the doors of Jehovah’s house and made himself altars at every corner in Jerusalem, 25 and in each and every city of Judah he made heights to make burnings to other gods, and provoked his fathers’ God Jehovah.
26 And as to the rest of his history, and all his courses first and last, they are recorded in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.
27 And Ahaz went to rest with his fathers, and they buried him in the city, in Jerusalem, for they did not put him into the tombs of the kings of Israel; and his son Hezekiah succeeded him.
29:1-36
29 Hezekiah was twenty-five years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned twenty-nine years at Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Abijah the daughter of Zecariah.
2 And he did what Jehovah approved, just as his father David had.
3 He, in the first year of his reign, at new moon of the first month, opened the doors of Jehovah’s house and strengthened them, 4 and brought in the priests and the Levites, and brought them together in the East Square and said to them
5 “Hear me, Levites.
Now put yourselves in sacred condition and put the house of your fathers’ God Jehovah in sacred condition, and take out the filth from what is holy, 6 because our fathers have been unfaithful and done what displeased our God Jehovah and left him, and turned their faces away from Jehovah’s dwelling and turned their backs to it; 7 they also shut the porch doors and put out the lamps, and did not burn incense nor offer burnt-offerings in the sanctuary to the God of Israel; 8 and Jehovah’s wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem, and he made them victims, a sight to stand aghast at and to whistle at, as you see with your own eyes; 9 and here our fathers have fallen by the sword, and our sons and daughters and wives are in foreign slavery, on this account.
10 It is now in my mind to make a covenant with Jehovah the God of Israel, that his anger may turn back from us.
11 Now, sons, do not take it easy; for it was you that Jehovah chose to stand before him to perform his service and to be servitors and incense-burners to him.”
12 And the Levites stood up, Mahath the son of ʽAmasai and Joel the son of ʽAzariah of the sons of the Kehathites, and of the sons of Merari Kish the son of ʽAbdi and ʽAzariah the son of Jehallelel, and of the Gershonites Joah the son of Zimmah and Gheden the son of Joah, 13 and of the sons of Elisaphan Shimri and Jeiel, and of the sons of Asaph Zecariah and Mattaniah, 14 and of the sons of Heman Jehiel and Shimei, and of the sons of Jeduthun Shemaʽiah and ʽUzziel, 15 and brought together their brothers; and they put themselves in sacred condition, and went in, in accordance with the king’s command by Jehovah’s words, to cleanse Jehovah’s house.
16 And the priests went into the interior of Jehovah’s house to do the cleansing, and brought all the unclean matter that they found in Jehovah’s temple out to the court of Jehovah’s house, and the Levites received it to carry out to Kidron Arroyo outside.
25 And he stationed the Levites in Jehovah’s house with cymbals, with harps, and with lyres, in accordance with the command of David and of the king’s seer Gad and of the prophet Nathan; for the command was by Jehovah by the prophets.
29 And when the burnt-offering was finished, the king and all who were present with him bowed and did reverence.
30 And King Hezekiah and the captains told the Levites to praise Jehovah in the words of David and Asaph the seer; and they praised right merrily, and bowed down and did reverence.
31 And Hezekiah responded “You have now qualified yourselves to take part in Jehovah’s worship; approach and bring sacrifices and thank-offerings for Jehovah’s house.”
And the assembly brought sacrifices and thank-offerings, and, any that were liberally disposed, burnt-offerings.
32 And the count of the burnt-offerings that the assembly brought was seventy cattle, a hundred rams, two hundred sheep: all these for burnt-offerings to Jehovah.
33 And of the sacramental offerings there were six hundred cattle and three thousand sheep and goats.
17 For there were numbers in the assembly who had not put themselves in sacred condition, and the Levites were engaged in slaughtering the passovers for everyone who was not clean, to hallow them for Jehovah.
And they ate the ordinance seven days, sacrificing welfare-sacrifices and giving thanks to their fathers’ God Jehovah; 23 and all the assembly came to the decision to celebrate another seven days, and they celebrated seven days with merrymaking.
24 For King Hezekiah contributed for the assembly a thousand steers and seven thousand sheep and goats, and the generals contributed for the assembly a thousand steers and ten thousand sheep and goats, and priests in great numbers put themselves in sacred condition.
25 And all the assembly of Judah, and the priests and the Levites, and all the assembly that had come from Israel, and the immigrants that had come from the Israelite country and were living in Judah, made merry; 26 and there was a great merrymaking in Jerusalem.
For since the time of Solomon the son of David, king of Israel, it had not been like this in Jerusalem.
27 And the Levite priests stood up and blessed the people, and God heard, and their prayer came into his holy dwelling heaven. 2 Chronicles
31:1-21 31 And when all this was finished, all Israel who were to be found in the cities of Judah went out and broke up the obelisks and chopped down the asherahs and pulled down the heights and the altars out of all Judah and Benjamin, and in Ephraim and Manasseh, till they had finished.
And all the sons of Israel went back to their cities to their properties.
2 And Hezekiah assigned the divisions of the priests and the Levites by their divisions suitably to each one’s service, the priests and Levites for burnt-offering and welfare-sacrifice, to officiate and to thank and praise Jehovah with songs.
3 And the king’s allowance out of his chattels was for the burnt-offerings, the morning and evening burnt-offerings and the burnt-offerings for the sabbaths and the new moons and the anniversaries, as is written in Jehovah’s code; 4 and he told the people, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, to give the allowance of the priests and the Levites, in order that they might hold fast to Jehovah’s code.
5 And when the news broke, the sons of Israel gave plenty of the first of grain, grape-juice, and oil and honey and all produce of the range, and brought the tithe of everything in large quantity; 6 and the sons of Israel and Judah who lived in the cities of Judah also brought tithe of cattle and sheep and goats and tithe of sacred things consecrated to their God Jehovah, and laid them by heaps.
7 It was in the third month they started the heaps, and in the seventh month they finished them; 8 and Hezekiah and the generals came and saw the heaps, and blessed Jehovah and his people Israel.
9 And Hezekiah inquired of the priests and Levites about the heaps; 10 and ʽAzariah the head priest of the family of Sadok told him “Since the contribution began to come in to Jehovah’s house there has been eating and taking our fill and leaving over in large quantity, because Jehovah has blessed his people; and we have this accumulation left.”
11 And Hezekiah told them to get ready vestry-rooms in Jehovah’s house; and they got them ready, 12 and brought in the contribution and the tithe and the sacred things faithfully.
20 And Hezekiah did the like in all Judah, and did what was good and right and loyal before his God Jehovah; 21 and in every work he initiated in the service of God’s house and in giving rulings and giving orders for devotion to his God, he acted whole-souledly and was successful.
32:1-33
32 After these events and this loyalty, King Sennacherib of Assyria came and invaded Judah, and beset all the fortified cities and proposed to lay them open to his troops.
2 And Hezekiah saw that Sennacherib had come in and was heading toward an attack on Jerusalem; 3 and he consulted with his generals and champions about choking down the water of the springs outside the city, and they backed him.
4 And they gathered a large number of people and choked all the sources of water and buried the bed of the arroyo that streams through the middle of the country, saying “Why should the kings of Assyria come and find plenty of water?” 5 And he consolidated his position and rebuilt all the dilapidated wall, and raised towers on it, and outside it another wall, and strengthened the Millo, David’s City, and provided missiles in large quantity, and shields.
6 And he put war-captains over the people, and gathered them before him in the square at the city gate and spoke encouragingly to them, 7 saying “Courage, and do your best; do not be afraid nor dismayed at the king of Assyria and at all the host he has with him, for there is more with us than with him.
8 He has with him an arm of flesh, but we have with us our God Jehovah to help us and to fight our battles.”
And the people were steadied by the words of King Hezekiah of Judah.
20 And Hezekiah and the prophet Isaiah the son of Amos prayed about this, and cried out to heaven.
21 And Jehovah sent an angel who killed off every champion fighter and staff officer and captain in the Assyrian king’s camp; and he went back crestfallen to his own country, and went into the house of his god, and some who had come out of his own body struck him down with swords.
22 And Jehovah saved Hezekiah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem out of the hands of King Sennacherib of Assyria and out of everybody’s hands, and gave them rest on all sides.
23 And many brought presents to Jehovah at Jerusalem, and rich objects to King Hezekiah of Judah; and he stood high in the eyes of all nations thenceforth.
24 In those days Hezekiah fell sick and was at the point of death; and he prayed to Jehovah, and he granted the prayer and gave him a token.
25 But Hezekiah did not requite him as the favor deserved; for his heart went high.
And there was wrath against him and against Judah and Jerusalem; 26 but Hezekiah humbled himself in his loftiness of heart, he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and Jehovah’s wrath did not come upon them in Hezekiah’s time.
30 And he, Hezekiah, blocked the outlet of the water of Upper Gihon and directed it down westward to David’s City.
33:1-25
33 Manasseh was twelve years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned fifty-five years at Jerusalem.
2 And he did what displeased Jehovah, like the detestable doings of the nations Jehovah dispossessed before the sons of Israel; 3 and he rebuilt the heights his father Hezekiah had pulled down, and set up altars to the Baals and made asherahs, and did reverence to all the legions of the sky and worshiped them, 4 and built altars in the house of Jehovah, which Jehovah had spoken of, “In Jerusalem my name shall forever be”; 5 and he built altars to all the legions of the sky in both the courts of Jehovah’s house.
6 And he, he sent his son over through the fire in Ben-Hinnom’s Valley, and practiced fortune-telling and believed in signs and played the wizard and employed spirit-mediums of different kinds: he did what displeased Jehovah on a great scale, provoking him.
7 And he set the effigy-statue he had made in the house of God, in the house of which God had said to David and his son Solomon “In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, I will set my name forever, 8 and I will no more dislodge Israel’s feet off the soil I set your fathers standing on, if only they take care to do just as I commanded them, all the instructions and usages and laws, by Moses.” 9 And Manasseh demoralized Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem into misdoing more than had the nations Jehovah had rooted out before the sons of Israel.
10 And Jehovah spoke to Manasseh and to his people, but they did not listen.
11 And Jehovah brought against them the generals of the king of Assyria, and they caught Manasseh with hooks and put him in fetters and took him to Babylon.
12 But when he was in distress he took steps to propitiate his God Jehovah, and humbled himself thoroughly before the God of his fathers 13 and prayed to him; and he let himself be invoked and listened to his appeal and brought him back to Jerusalem to his royalty, and Manasseh knew that Jehovah was God.
14 And after that he built an outer wall for David’s City west of Gihon in the arroyo and of the approach to the Fish Gate and around the castle ridge, and made it very high; and he set army officers in all the fortified cities in Judah.
15 And he removed the foreign gods and the effigy from Jehovah’s house, and all the altars he had built on the mountain of Jehovah’s house and in Jerusalem, and threw them away outside the city, 16 and reconditioned the altar of Jehovah and sacrificed welfare-sacrifices and sacrifices of thanks on it, and told Judah to worship Jehovah the God of Israel.
17 The people still, though, sacrificed on the heights, but only to their God Jehovah.
18 And as to the rest of the history of Manasseh, and his prayer to his God, and the words of the seers who spoke to him in the name of Jehovah the God of Israel, they are in the history of the kings of Israel.
19 And as to his praying and having his prayer granted, and all his sin and his unfaithfulness, and the places in which he built heights and erected the asherahs and the carvings before his humbling himself, they are recorded in the chronicles of the seers.
20 And Manasseh went to rest with his fathers, and they buried him at his house; and his son Amon succeeded him.
21 Amon was twenty-two years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned two years at Jerusalem. 22 And he did what displeased Jehovah, as his father Manasseh had; and Amon sacrificed to all the carvings his father Manasseh had made, and worshiped them.
34:1-33
34 Josiah was eight years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned thirty-one years at Jerusalem.
2 And he did what Jehovah approved, and went by the paths of his father David, and did not turn off to right or to left.
3 And in the eighth year of his reign, while he was still a boy, he began to devote himself to the God of his father David; and in the twelfth year he began to cleanse Judah and Jerusalem from the heights and the asherahs and the carvings and the bronze statues, 4 and they pulled down before him the altars of the Baals, and he chopped down the hammans that were up over them and broke up the asherahs and carvings and bronzes and reduced them to powder and threw it over the graves of those who had sacrificed on them, 5 and burned priests’ bones on their altars, and cleansed Judah and Jerusalem; 6 and in the cities of Manasseh and Ephraim and Simeon and up to Naphtali he went round among their ruins 7 and pulled down the altars, and pounded fine the asherahs and the carvings, and chopped down all the hammans throughout the Israelite country, and came back to Jerusalem.
8 And in the year eighteen of his reign, to cleanse the country and the house, he sent Shaphan the son of Asaliah and Maʽasejah the captain of the city and Joah the son of Joahaz the king’s private secretary to repair the house of his God Jehovah; 9 and they came to High Priest Hilkijah and delivered the money that had been brought into the house of God, that the Levites who kept the thresholds had collected from the hands of Manasseh and Ephraim and from all the remainder of Israel and from all Judah and Benjamin and the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
10 gave it into the hands of the contractors employed on Jehovah’s house, and the contractors working on Jehovah’s house gave it for mending and strengthening the house, 11 gave it to the carpenters and builders to buy dressed stone and wood for the ties and for retimbering the houses that the kings of Judah had allowed to break down.
12 And the men worked on honor on the job, and had over them commissioners, Jahath and ʽObadiah the Levites, sons of Merari, and Zecariah and Meshullam, Kehathites, to give directions; and the Levites, all who were proficient with instruments of song, 13 were over the carriers and giving directions for one and another piece of work to all who worked on the job; and some of the Levites were account-keepers and marshals and gatemen.
14 And while they were getting out the money that had been brought into Jehovah’s house, Priest Hilkijah found the code Jehovah had given through Moses; 15 and so Hilkijah said to Secretary Shaphan “I have found the Code in Jehovah’s house”; and Hilkijah gave the book to Shaphan.
16 And Shaphan brought the book to the king, and, besides, made his report to the king, “Everything that was put into your servants’ hands they are doing; 17 and they have poured out the money that was found in Jehovah’s house and given it into the hands of the commissioners and the contractors.” 18 And Secretary Shaphan told the king “Priest Hilkijah has given me a book”; and Shaphan read from it before the king; 19 and when the king heard the words of the Code he tore his clothes.
20 And the king gave Hilkijah and Ahikam the son of Shaphan and ʽAbdon the son of Micah and Secretary Shaphan and King’s Sergeant ʽAsajah the order 21 “Go inquire of Jehovah on my behalf and on behalf of what remains of Israel and Judah about the words of the book that has been found, because it is a great ire of Jehovah’s that is poured out on us for our fathers’ not having observed the words of this book, and acted in accordance with all that is written in this book.” 22 And Hilkijah and those whom the king had named went to the prophetess Huldah the wife of Shallum the son of Tokhath the son of Hasrah the keeper of the wardrobe (she lived in Jerusalem, in the second quarter), and spoke to her to this effect.
23 And she said to them “Says Israel’s God Jehovah, Say to the man who sent you to me 24 ‘Says Jehovah, I am bringing mischief upon this place and its inhabitants, all the maledictions written in the book that they have read before the king of Judah.
25 In return for their having left me and made burnings to other gods, provoking me with all their manufactures, my ire is poured out upon this place and will not die down.’ 26 And to the king of Judah who sent you to inquire of Jehovah you shall say ‘Says Israel’s God Jehovah, the words which you have heard.
27 Since your heart quailed and you humbled yourself before God when you heard my words against this place and its inhabitants, and you humbled yourself before me and tore your clothes and wept before me, I on my part have heard it, quoth Jehovah.
28 I am taking you home to your fathers, and you shall be taken home to your grave in peace, and your eyes shall not look upon all the mischief I am bringing on this place and its inhabitants.’”
And they reported it to the king.
29 And the king sent and brought together all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem, 30 and the king went up to Jehovah’s house, and all the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem and the priests and the Levites and all the people from the greatest to the smallest, and he read to them all the words of the book of the covenant that had been found in Jehovah’s house.
31 And the king stood at his place and ratified the covenant before Jehovah, to follow Jehovah and keep his commandments and his lessons and his usages unreservedly and heartily, living up to the provisions of the covenant, which are recorded in this book.
32 And he had all who were present in Jerusalem and Benjamin stand. And the inhabitants of Jerusalem lived up to their covenant with God, their fathers’ God.
33 And Josiah removed everything abominable out of all the countries that belonged to the sons of Israel, and reformed all who were found in Israel to worship their fathers’ God Jehovah; all his lifetime they did not turn aside from following their fathers’ God Jehovah.
35:1-27
35 And Josiah celebrated a passover to Jehovah in Jerusalem; and they slaughtered the passover on the fourteenth of the first month.
2 And he stationed the priests for their functions, and exhorted them to the service of God’s house, 3 and said to the Levites who had to give explanations to all Israel, who were sacred to Jehovah, “By the putting of the sacred ark in the house that Solomon the son of David, king of Israel, built, you have no carrying on shoulders to do; now serve your God Jehovah and his people Israel, 4 and prepare yourselves by families, in accordance with your divisions, as prescribed by King David of Israel and by his son Solomon, 5 and stand in the sanctuary, for the family sections of your brothers the laity a family division of the Levites, 6 and slaughter the passover; and put yourselves in sacred condition, and make preparations for your brothers, for doing in accordance with Jehovah’s word by Moses.”
7 And Josiah contributed small cattle for the laity, sheep and young he-goats, all for passover offerings for everyone who presented himself, to the number of thirty thousand, and horned cattle three thousand; these were out of the king’s chattels. 8 And his generals contributed voluntarily for the people, for the priests, and for the Levites.
Hilkijah and Zecariah and Jehiel, the wardens of God’s house, gave the priests twenty-six hundred for passover sacrifices, and three hundred horned cattle; 9 and Conaniah and Shemaʽiah and Nethaneel their brothers, and Hashabiah and Jeiel and Jozabad the chiefs of the Levites, contributed for the Levites five thousand for passover sacrifices and five hundred horned cattle.
10 And the work was made ready, and the priests stood in their stations and the Levites in their divisions, in accordance with the king’s command.
11 And they slaughtered the passover, and the priests threw blood, and the Levites were skinning; 12 and they removed the burnt-offerings to give them to the laity by family sections to present to Jehovah, as is written in the book of Moses; and the same with the horned cattle.
13 And they duly cooked the passover with fire, and boiled the sacramental offerings in pots and crocks and kettles and ran them to all the laity, 14 and afterward they prepared for themselves and for the priests; for the priests, the sons of Aaron, were at the offering of the burnt-offerings and the fats till night, and the Levites prepared for themselves and for the priests, the sons of Aaron.
15 And the singers, the sons of Asaph, were at their stations in accordance with the command of David and Asaph and Heman and Jeduthun the king’s seer, and the gatemen were at one and another gate; there was no going away from their service for them, because their brother Levites prepared for them.
16 And all Jehovah’s service was prepared that day, celebrating the passover and offering the burnt-offerings on Jehovah’s altar, in accordance with King Josiah’s commandment; 17 and the sons of Israel who were present celebrated the passover at that time, and the feast of matzoth seven days.
18 And no passover like it had been celebrated in Israel since the days of the prophet Samuel; and all the kings of Israel had not celebrated the like of the passover that Josiah and the priests and the Levites, and all Judah and Israel who presented themselves, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, celebrated.
19 In the year eighteen of Josiah’s reign this passover was celebrated.
20 After all this, that Josiah had put the house in order, King Neco of Egypt went up to fight at Carkemish on the Euphrates, and Josiah went out to oppose him.
21 And he sent envoys to him with the message. “What business have you with me, king of Judah?
It [is] not against you today but at the Euphrates that my war is, and God has spoken to hurry me; keep clear of God, who is with me, and do not have him make away with you.” 22 But Josiah did not turn his face from him, but resolved to fight him and did not listen to Neco’s words from the mouth of God, and came to fight on the plain of Megiddo.
23 And the archers hit King Josiah, and he said to his officers “Pass me out, for I am hard hit”; 24 and his officers passed him out of the chariot and put him into his second chariot and brought him to Jerusalem; and he died, and was buried in the graves of his fathers.
And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned over Josiah; 25 and Jeremiah sang a lament for Josiah; and all singers mention Josiah in their dirges to this day, and have made it a usage for Israel; they are to be found written down among the dirges.
36:1-23
36 And the populace took Josiah’s son Jehoahaz and installed him as his father’s successor at Jerusalem.
2 Jehoahaz was twenty-three years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned three months at Jerusalem.
3 And the king of Egypt removed him at Jerusalem, and gave the country a fine of a hundred hundredweight of silver and a hundredweight of gold; 4 and the king of Egypt installed his brother Eljakim as king over Judah and Jerusalem, and renamed him Jehojakim.
And Neco took his brother Jehoahaz and brought him to Egypt.
5 Jehojakim was twenty-five years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned eleven years at Jerusalem; and he did what displeased his God Jehovah.
6 Against him King Nebucadnessar of Babylon came up, and put him in fetters to take him to Babylon; 7 and Nebucadnessar brought some of the vessels of Jehovah’s house to Babylon and put them in his palace in Babylon.
8 And as to the rest of the history of Jehojakim and his detestable deeds that he committed, and what is to be found about him, it is recorded in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.
And his son Jehojakin succeeded him. 9 Jehojakin was eight years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned three months and ten days at Jerusalem; and he did what displeased Jehovah.
10 And at the return of the year King Nebucadnessar sent and brought him to Babylon, with the choice vessels of Jehovah’s house, and installed his brother Sidkijah as king over Judah and Jerusalem.
11 Sidkijah was twenty-one years old at his accession to the throne, and reigned eleven years at Jerusalem; 12 and he did what displeased his God Jehovah; he did not humble himself before the prophet Jeremiah, who prophesied from Jehovah’s mouth.
13 And he also rebelled against King Nebucadnessar, who had had him swear by God; and he was too hard-necked and obdurate-hearted to turn back to Israel’s God Jehovah.
14 Also all the generals of Judah and the priests and the people were in many ways unfaithful, doing like all the detestable doings of the nations, and defiled Jehovah’s house which he had hallowed in Jerusalem.
15 And their fathers’ God Jehovah sent to them by his messengers, each one early, because he did not want his people and his dwelling hurt; 16 but they made jokes on God’s messengers and despised his words and put derisive indignities on his prophets till Jehovah’s ire rose unappeasably against his people, 17 and he brought the king of the Chaldeans up against them, who killed their young men with the sword in their holy house and did not spare young man or maiden, elder nor graybeard; he gave all into his hands.
18 And all the vessels of the house of God, great and small, and the treasures of Jehovah’s house and the treasures of the king and the generals, all he brought to Babylon.
19 And he burned the house of God, and tore down the wall of Jerusalem and burned down its palaces, and let all its choice furniture be spoiled.
20 And he deported to Babylon the remnant that was left from the swords, and they became subjects to him and his sons till the rise of the Persian empire, 21 to fulfill Jehovah’s word by the mouth of Jeremiah, till the country had paid up its sabbaths: all the time of its desolation it kept sabbath, filling out seventy years.
22 And in the year one of King Cyrus of Persia, for the finishing of Jehovah’s prediction by the mouth of Jeremiah, Jehovah stirred the spirit of King Cyrus of Persia and he had proclamation made by criers throughout his empire, and also in writing, 23 “Cyrus king of Persia says: Jehovah, God of the heavens, has given me all the kingdoms of the earth; and he has charged me to build him a house at Jerusalem in Judah.
Whoever of all his people among you will volunteer to go, be his God with him and let him go up.”
Ezra 1:1-11
1 And in the year one of King Cyrus of Persia, for the finishing of Jehovah’s prediction out of the mouth of Jeremiah, Jehovah stirred the spirit of King Cyrus of Persia and he had proclamation made by criers throughout his empire, and also in writing,
2 “Cyrus king of Persia says: Jehovah, God of the heavens, has given me all the kingdoms of the earth; and he has charged me to build him a house at Jerusalem in Judah.
2:1-70
2 And these are the sons of the province, those who came up out of the serfdom of the deportees whom King Nebucadnessar of Babylon had deported to Babylon and came back to Jerusalem and Judah, each to his city, 2 who came with Zerubbabel, Jeshuaʽ, Nehemiah, Serajah, Raʽamiah, Nahamani, Mordocai, Bishlan, Masparath, Bigvai, Rehum, Baʽanah.
The number of the men of the people of Israel:
3 the sons of Pareosh, twenty-one hundred and seventy-two;
4 the sons of Shephatiah, three hundred and seventy-two;
5 the sons of Arah, seven hundred and seventy-five;
6 From the first day of the seventh month they began offering burnt-offerings to Jehovah, but the foundation of Jehovah’s temple had not been laid.
7 And in Artaxerxes’s time Bishlam, Mithradata, Tabeel, and the rest of their fellow-colonists wrote to King Artaxerxes of Persia; and the script of the document is written in Aramaic and translated.
(In Aramaic:)
8 Commandant Rehum and Secretary Shimshai wrote this letter against Jerusalem to King Artaxerxes, as follows.
9 Then Commandant Rehum and Secretary Shimshai and the rest of their fellow-colonists, the Dinaites and the Apharsathkites, the Tarpelites, the Apharsites, the Arkevites, the Babylonians, the Susianans, the Dehites, the ʽElamites, 10 and the rest of the nations that the great and august Asurbanipal deported and settled in the city of Samaria and the rest of Trans-Euphrates, ss.
11 This is a copy of the letter sent to King Artaxerxes by his servants the men of Trans-Euphrates, ss.
12 “Be it known to the king that the Judahites who came up from you to us have come to Jerusalem, the rebellious and malignant city; they are building, and are completing the walls and digging for the foundations.
13 Now be it known to the king that if that city is rebuilt and its walls are completed, they will not pay taxes, levies, and tributes, and it will make trouble for future kings.
14 Now inasmuch as we eat the salt of the palace and it is not proper for us to view the denuding of the king, for this reason we send and notify the king 15 that search be made in the book of your fathers’ history; and you will find in the book of history, and thereby learn, that that city has been a rebellious city and a troublemaker for kings and provinces, and they have been making insurrections in it, long since; that was why that city was laid waste.
16 Now we are notifying the king that if that city is rebuilt and its walls completed, in consequence you with not have any share of Trans-Euphrates.”
17 The king sent a rescript to Commandant Rehum and Secretary Shimshai and the rest of their fellow-colonists resident in Samaria and the rest of Trans-Euphrates, “Peace, ss.
18 The communication you sent me has been read before me point by point, 19 and by my orders they have searched and found that that city has long been insubordinate to kings, and has rebelled and insurrections have been made in it, 20 and there have been mighty kings over Jerusalem, sovereign over all Trans-Euphrates, and taxes, levies, and tributes have been paid to them.
21 Now give orders to have those men leave off, and let that city not be rebuilt until further orders.
22 And beware of negligent dealing as to this, lest mischief should increase to make trouble for kings.”
23 Then, when a copy of King Artaxerxes’s communication had been read before Rehum and Secretary Shimshai and their fellow-colonists, they came rushing to Jerusalem against the Judahites and made them leave off by main force.
24 Then the work on God’s house at Jerusalem was broken off, and was at a standstill till the year two of King Darius of Persia.
Ezra
5:1-17 5 But Haggai the prophet, and Zecariah the son of ʽIddo the prophets, prophesied to the Judahites in Judah and Jerusalem by the name of Israel’s God upon them.
2 Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel and Jeshuaʽ the son of Josadak stood up and began to build God’s house at Jerusalem, and they had with them God’s prophets backing them up.
“To King Darius, all peace.
8 Be it known to the king that we have gone to the province of Judah to the house of the great God; and it is being built in heavy stone, and timber is being set in the walls, and that work is being done thoroughly and is making good progress in their hands.
9 Then we questioned those elders as follows: ‘Who gave you orders to build this house and to complete this sacred precinct?’ 10 and we also asked them their names to be notified to you, which we write down: names of the men at their head.
11 And they returned us a statement as follows: ‘We are the worshipers of the God of heaven and earth, and are rebuilding the house which had been built many years earlier, a great king of Israel having built it and completed it; 12 only when our fathers had provoked the God of heaven to wrath he gave them into the hands of Nebucadnessar, the Chaldean king of Babylon, and he laid this house in ruins and deported the people to Babylon.
Ezra 6:1-22
6 Then King Darius gave orders and they searched in the storage library in Babylon, 2 and there was found at Ecbatana, in the palace in the province of Media, a certain roll, and a memorandum thus written in it: 3 “In the year one of King Cyrus, King Cyrus gave orders
8 And it is hereby ordered that you cooperate with those elders of the Judahites for building that house of God, and out of the royal funds of the taxes of Trans-Euphrates let the expenses be thoroughly paid to those men that there may be no failure of what they need.
9 And let steers and rams and lambs for burnt-offerings to the God of heaven, wheat, salt, wine, and oil as the priests at Jerusalem may say, be given to them day by day without negligence, 10 that they may offer genial offerings to the God of heaven and pray for the life of the king and of his sons.
11 And it is hereby ordered that any man who authorizes any action inconsistent with this rescript shall have a timber torn out of his house and be impaled erect upon it, and his house shall be made a garbage-dump for this.
12 And the God who has installed his name there shall overthrow any king or nation that puts forth a hand to act otherwise, to damage that house of God at Jerusalem.
I Darius give the order; let it be done thoroughly.”
13 Then Tattenai, governor of Trans-Euphrates, Shethar Bozenai, and their fellow-colonists, inasmuch as Darius had sent word, did thus thoroughly; 14 and the elders of the Judahites did the building and had good success by the prophesying of the prophet Haggai and Zecariah the son of ʽIddo.
And they did the building and completed it, at the order of the God of Israel and of Cyrus and Darius and King Artaxerxes of Persia.
15 And they kept at work on this house till the twenty-third day of the month of Adar; that is the year six of the reign of King Darius.
16 And the sons of Israel, the priests and the Levites and the rest of the returned deportees, held the dedication services of this house of God with festivity, 17 and offered for the dedication of this house of God a hundred bulls, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs, and twelve goats, to the number of the tribes of Israel, for a sin-offering for all Israel; 18 and they set the priests by courses and the Levites by sections for the divine service at Jerusalem as is written in the book of Moses.
19 And the returned deportees kept the passover on the fourteenth of the first month.
20 For the priests and Levites had purified themselves as one man, they were all of them clean, and they killed the passover for all the returned deportees and for their brothers the priests and for themselves; 21 and the sons of Israel who had come back from the deportation ate, and all who had separated themselves from the uncleanness of the local heathens to join them in devotion to Israel’s God Jehovah.
22 And they kept the feast of matzoth seven days with festivity, because Jehovah had gladdened them and turned the heart of the king of Assyria toward them to strengthen their hands in the work of the house of God, Israel’s God.
Ezra
7:1-28
7 And after these events, in the reign of King Artaxerxes of Persia, ʽEzra the son of Serajah the son of ʽAzariah the son of Hilkijah 2 the son of Shallum the son of Sadok the son of Ahitub 3 the son of Amariah the son of ʽAzariah the son of Merajoth 4 the son of Zerahiah the son of ʽUzzi the son of Bukki 5 the son of Abishuaʽ the son of Pinehas the son of Eleazar the son of Aaron the first priest
6 he, ʽEzra, came up from Babylon; and he was an expert scribe in Moses’s code which Israel’s God Jehovah gave; and the king had given him, in accordance with Jehovah’s hand upon him, everything that he had requested; and there came up to Jerusalem 7 some of the sons of Israel and some of the priests and the Levites and the singers and the gatemen and the temple servants, in the year seven of King Artaxerxes.
8 And he came to Jerusalem in the fifth month; that is the year seven of King Artaxerxes.
9 For on the first of the first month he began the arrangements for the journey up from Babylon, and on the first of the fifth month he came to Jerusalem in accordance with God’s good hand upon him.
10 For ʽEzra had firmly made up his mind to devote himself to Jehovah’s code and to do and to teach in Jerusalem what was correct and lawful.
11 And this is a copy of the note King Artaxerxes gave to Priest ʽEzra the scribe, scribe of the words of Jehovah’s commandments and rules for Israel: 12 “Artaxerxes, king of kings, to Priest ʽEzra, scribe of the law of the God of heaven, etc., ss.
13 It is hereby ordered that anyone in my kingdom of the people of Israel and of its priests and Levites who volunteers to go to Jerusalem with you shall go, 14 inasmuch as you are sent from the king and his seven counselors to examine into conditions about Judah and at Jerusalem from the point of view of the law of your God which you have in your hand, 15 and to bring silver and gold which the king and his counselors have donated to the God of Israel whose abode is in Jerusalem, 16 and all silver and gold that you may find in all the province of Babylon, with the donations of the people and the priests who donate for the house of their God at Jerusalem.
17 In consideration of this you are to buy carefully with this money bulls, rams, lambs, and their grain-offerings and libations, and offer them on the altar of the God of heaven at Jerusalem; 18 and what it seems good to you and your brothers to do with the remainder of the silver and gold in accordance with the pleasure of your God you are to do.
19 And deliver before the God of Jerusalem the vessels that are given you for the service of the house of God.
20 And the rest of the needs of the house of your God which it shall fall to you to provide you shall provide out of the royal treasury.
21 And all subtreasurers in Trans-Euphrates are hereby ordered by me Artaxerxes, the king, that everything that Priest ʽEzra the scribe of the law of the God of heaven asks you for be done thoroughly 22 to the extent of a hundred talents of silver and of a thousand bushels of wheat and of eight hundred gallons of wine and of eight hundred gallons of oil, and salt at discretion.
23 Let everything the God of heaven orders be done precisely for the house of the God of heaven; for why should there be anger against the empire of the king and of his sons? 24 And take notice that it is not permissible to impose taxes, levies, or tributes on any of the priests and Levites, singers, gatekeepers, temple servants, and attendants of this house of God.
25 And you, ʽEzra, in accordance with the wisdom of your God which you have in your hand, are to appoint judges and magistrates who are to judge all the people in Trans-Euphrates, everybody who knows the laws of your God; and him who does not know you are to enlighten.
26 And on anyone who does not live up to your God’s law and the king’s law let sentence be duly executed, whether for death or for excommunication or for fine or for imprisonment.”
27 Blessed be our fathers’ God Jehovah who put such a thing as this into the king’s heart, to give a magnificent status to Jehovah’s house at Jerusalem, 28 and gave the king and his counselors and all his powerful generals a friendly disposition toward me!
And I took courage from the hand of my God Jehovah resting on me, and gathered heads out of Israel to go up with me.
8:1-36
8 And these are the heads of families, and their lists, that came up with me in the reign of King Artaxerxes from Babylon:
2 Of the sons of Pinehas, Gershom. Of the sons of Ithamar, Daniel.
Of the sons of David, Hattush, 3 one of the sons of Shecaniah. Of the sons of Pareosh, Zecariah, and with him were listed, of males, a hundred and fifty.
4 Of the sons of Pahath Moab, Eljehoʽenai the son of Zerahiah, and with him two hundred, the males.
5 Of the sons of Zattu, Shecaniah the son of Jahaziel, and with him three hundred, the males.
6 And of the sons of ʽAdin, ʽEbed the son of Jonathan, and with him fifty, the males.
7 And of the sons of ʽElam, Jeshaʽiah the son of ʽAthaliah, and with him seventy, the males.
8 And of the sons of Shephatiah, Zebadiah the son of Micael, and with him eighty, the males.
9 And of the sons of Joab, ʽObadiah the son of Jehiel, and with him two hundred and eighteen, the males.
10 And of the sons of Bani, Shelomith the son of Josiphiah, and with him a hundred and sixty, the males.
11 And of the sons of Bebai, Zecariah the son of Bebai, and with him twenty-eight, the males.
12 And of the sons of ʽAzgad, Johanan the son of Hakkatan, and with him a hundred and ten, the males.
13 And of the sons of Adonikam latecomers, and these were their names: Eliphelet, Jeiel, and Shemaʽiah; and with them sixty, the males.
14 And of the sons of Bigvai, Ghuthai the son of Zaccur, and with him seventy, the males.
15 And I gathered them to the river that runs into Ahava; and when we had been there three days I looked over the people and the priests, and did not find any of the sons of Levi there.
16 And I sent Eliʽezer, Ariel, Shemaʽiah and Elnathan and Jarib and Elnathan and Nathan and Zecariah and Meshullam, headmen, and Jojarib and Elnathan, expounders, 17 and commissioned them to Iddo the head at the place Casiphja, and gave them a message for speaking to Iddo and his brothers the temple servants at the place Casiphja to bring us servitors for the house of our God; 18 and they brought us, in accordance with the good hand of our God resting on us, a sensible man, one of the sons of Mahli the son of Levi the son of Israel, Sherebiah, and his sons and his brothers, eighteen of them; 19 and Hashabiah and with him Jeshaʽiah, of the sons of Merari, his brothers and sons, twenty of them; 20 and of the temple servants whom David and the generals had given for the service of the Levites two hundred and twenty temple servants, all listed by name.
21 And I proclaimed a fast there by the river Ahava to present ourselves submissively before our God to seek from him a clear course for us and our children and all our chattels.
22 For I had been ashamed to ask the king for troops and riders to help us against enemies on the road, because I had said to the king “All who betake themselves to our God have over them his hand for their good, but those who leave him have over them his might and anger.” 23 And we fasted and besought our God about this, and he granted our prayer.
24 And I set apart twelve of the chiefs of the priests, and Sherebiah and Hashabiah and with them ten of their brothers, 25 and weighed out to them the silver and the gold and the vessels, the contribution for the house of our God that the king and his counselors and generals and all of Israel that were to be found had made; 26 and I weighed into their hands six hundred and twenty-five hundredweight of silver, and a hundred silver vessels, two hundredweight, ninety-six hundredweight of gold, 27 and twenty gold stoups, two hundred and seventy ounces, and ten vessels of fine bright bronze as desirable as gold.
28 And I said to them “You are consecrated to Jehovah, and the vessels are sacred, and the silver and gold are a donation to our fathers’ God Jehovah; 29 guard them carefully till you weigh them out before the chiefs of the priests and Levites and the chiefs of families of Israel in the vestries at Jehovah’s house at Jerusalem.” 30 And the priests and Levites received the weighed-out silver and gold and the vessels to bring to Jehovah’s house at Jerusalem.
31 And we set out from the river of Ahava on the twelfth of the first month to go to Jerusalem; and our God’s hand was over us, and he delivered us from the hands of enemy and prowler on the road.
32 And we came to Jerusalem and stayed there three days, 33 and on the fourth day the silver and gold and vessels were weighed out in our God’s house into the hands of Priest Meremoth the son of Urijah, and with him Eleazar the son of Pinehas, and with them the Levites Jozabad the son of Jeshuaʽ and Noʽadiah the son of Binnui, 34
all by count and by weight; and all the weight was written down.
35 At that time those who had come in from their serfdom, the returned deportees, presented burnt-offerings to the God of Israel: twelve steers on behalf of all Israel, ninety-six rams, seventy-seven sheep, twelve he-goats for sin-offering, all a burnt-offering to Jehovah.
36 And they gave the king’s mandates to the king’s satraps and the governors of Trans-Euphrates, and they helped on the people and the house of God.
9:1-15
9 And when these things were finished the chiefs approached me with the word “The people, Israel, and the priests and the Levites, have not separated themselves from the peoples of the countries with their abominable ways, the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Perizzite, the Jebusite, the ʽAmmonite, the Moabite, the Egyptian, and the Amorite; 2 for they have taken daughters of theirs as wives for themselves and their sons, and mixed the sacred blood with the peoples of the countries; and the hands of the chiefs and the magnates have been first in this disloyalty.” 3 And when I heard this word I tore my cloak and my robe and tore hair out of my head and beard and sat down horror-struck, 4 and all who were alarmed by the words of the God of Israel came together to me on account of the deportees’ disloyalty.
And I sat horror-struck till evening grain-offering 5 and at evening grain-offering I stood up from my abasement and, in the torn pieces of my cloak and robe, fell on my knees and spread out my hands to my God Jehovah and said
6 “My God, I am ashamed and humiliated to raise my face, my God, to you, because our offenses are so many as to overtop our heads and our guilts so great as to reach to the skies.
7 Since our fathers’ days we have been in great guilt up to this day, and for our offenses we, our kings, our priests, have been given into the hands of the kings of one country after another in slaughter, in serfdom, and in plundering and shame of face as at this day.
8 And now for a brief moment there has come favor from our God Jehovah, letting us have an escaping remnant and giving us a peg in his holy place, our God brightening up our eyes and making us germ of a little life in our slavery
9 for we are slaves, but in our slavery our God has not abandoned us but has given the kings of Persia a friendly disposition toward us, giving us a germ of life for rearing aloft the house of our God and for reoccupying his waste sites, and giving us a fence in Judah and Jerusalem.
10 And now, our God, what shall we say after this, when we have forsaken your commandments 11 which you enjoined upon us through your servants the prophets, ‘The country you are going into to take possession of it is a filthy country by the filth of the peoples of the countries, by their abominable doings in which they have filled it from end to end with their uncleanness; 12 now do not give your daughters to their sons nor take their daughters for your sons; and you are not to attempt anything for their welfare or advantage, world without end, in order that you may be strong and eat the good things of the country and pass the possession on to your sons forever.’ 13 And after all that has come upon us by our evil deeds and our great guilt, when you, our God, have held down part of our guilt and given us such survival as this, 14 should we go back to breaking your commandments and intermarrying with these abominable peoples? will you not be angry at us to the point of finishing us off to leave no remnant or survivors? 15 Jehovah, God of Israel, you are doing the right thing that we remain surviving as we are this day; here we are before you in our guilt, because there is no such thing as standing before you on this account.”
Ezra 10:1-44
10 And as ʽEzra made his prayer and confession, weeping and throwing himself down before the house of God, there gathered to him a very great assembly out of Israel, men and women and children; for the people were weeping at a great rate.
2 And Shecaniah the son of Jehiel, of the sons of ʽElam, replied to ʽEzra “We have been disloyal to our God and taken in foreign women out of the peoples of the country; but now there is a chance of hope for Israel as to this.
3 Now let us make a covenant to our God to turn out all women and what is born from them in accordance with my lord’s recommendations.”
And those who were alarmed by the commandments of our God stood up 4 and said “Stand up, because the matter is in your sphere, and you have us with you; take a strong stand, and act.”
5 And ʽEzra stood up and swore the chiefs of the priests and Levites and all Israel to act in accordance with these words, and they took the oath.
6 And ʽEzra left his place before the house of God and went to the vestry of Jehohanan the son of Eljashib and spent the night there, not eating nor drinking water, because he was mourning over the deportees’ disloyalty.
7 And they sent around a proclamation in Judah and Jerusalem to all the returned deportees to gather at Jerusalem; 8 and anybody who did not come in after three days should, by resolution of the chiefs and elders, have all his chattels declared deodand and be excommunicated from the assembly of the deportees.
9 And all the men of Judah and Benjamin gathered at Jerusalem after three days; that was the ninth month, on the tenth of the month; and all the people sat down in the square of the house of God, shivering over the business and because of the rainy weather.
10 And Priest ʽEzra stood up and said to them “You have been disloyal and taken in foreign women, adding to Israel’s guilt.
11 But now give praise to your fathers’ God Jehovah and do what he will approve, and separate yourselves from the peoples of the country and from the foreign women.” 12 And all the assembly answered with a loud voice “We will do just as you are telling us to.
13 The people are numerous, though, and it is the rainy season, and we have not the strength to stand outdoors; and it is not a one-day or two-day business, because we have committed a great deal of crime in this respect.
14 Let our chiefs be a standing commission for all the assembly, and let everybody in our cities who has taken in foreign women come at specified times, and with them the elders and judges of each city, till we have turned back our God’s anger from us as to this matter.” 15 (Only Jonathan the son of ʽAsahel and Jahziah the son of Tikvah made a stand against this, and Meshullam and Shabbethai the Levite helped them.) 16 And the returned deportees did so; and Priest ʽEzra picked out men, heads of the families they belonged to, all by name, and they took their seats on the first day of the tenth month to see about the matter; 17 and they finished with all the men who had taken in foreign women by the first day of the first month.
18 And there were found of the sons of the priests that had taken in foreign women, of the sons of Jeshuaʽ the son of Josadak and his brothers Maʽasejah and Eliʽezer and Jarib and Gedaliah; 19 and they gave their hands to turn out their wives, and were obligated to indemnity of a ram for their guilt; 20 and of the sons of Immer Hanani and Zebadiah; 21 and of the sons of Harim Maʽasejah and Elijah and Shemaʽiah and Jehiel and ʽUzzijah; 22 and of the sons of Pashhur Eljoʽenai, Maʽasejah, Ishmaʽel, Nethanel, Jozabad, and Eleasah.
23 And of the Levites, Jozabad and Shimei and Kelajah (that is, Kelitah), Pethahiah, Jehudah, and Eliʽezer.
24 And of the singers, Eljashib.
And of the gatemen, Shallum and Telem and Uri.
25 And of Israel, of the sons of Pareosh Ramiah and Izzijah and Malkijah and Mijamin and Eleazar and Malkijah and Benajah; 26 and of the sons of ʽElam Mattaniah and Zecariah and Jehiel and ʽAbdi and Jeremoth and Elijah; 27 and of the sons of Zattu Eljoʽenai, Eljashib, Mattaniah, and Jeremoth and Zabad and ʽAzizah; 28 and of the sons of Bebai Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, ʽAthli; 29 and of the sons of Bani Meshullam, Malluc, Jedaʽiah, Jashub, Ishal, Jeremoth; 30 and of the sons of Pahath Moab Ghadna and Kelal, Benajah, Maʽasejah, Mattaniah, Besalel and Binnui and Menassheh; 31 and of the sons of Harim Eliʽezer, Isshijah, Malkijah, Shemaʽiah, Shimeon, 32 Benjamin, Malluc, Shemariah; 33 and of the sons of Hashum Mattenai, Mattattah, Zabad, Eliphelet, Jeremai, Menassheh, Shimei; 34 and of the sons of Bani Maʽadi, ʽAmram and Uel, 35 Benajah, Bediah, Keluhi, 36 Vaniah, Meremoth, Eljashib, 37 Mattaniah, Mattenai and Jaʽasai; 38 and of the sons of Binnui Shimei 39 and Shelemiah and Nathan and ʽAdajah; 40 and of the sons of ʽAzgad Shashai, Sharai, 41 ʽAzarel and Shelemjahu, Shemariah, 42 Shallum, Amariah, Joseph; 43 of the sons of Nebo Jeiel, Mattithiah, Zabad, Zebina, Jaddai and Joel, Benajah.
44 All these had married foreign wives, and some of them wives and had begotten sons.
Nehemiah
1:1-11
1 The words of Nehemiah the son of Hacaliah.
And in the month of Kislev of the year twenty I was in Susa Citadel, 2 and in came Hanani, one of my brothers, he and some men from Judah; and I asked them about the Judahites, the survivors that remained from the foreign servitude, and about Jerusalem; 3 and they told me “The remnant, those who remain there in the province from the foreign servitude, are in great hardship and in ignominy, and the wall of Jerusalem is broken and its gates have been burned down.”
4 And when I heard these things I sat down and wept, and mourned some days, and was fasting and praying before the God of heaven; 5 and I said “Ah, Jehovah, God of heaven, great and terrible Deity, keeper of covenant and friendship for those who love you and keep your commandments, 6 let your ears be attentive and your eyes open to hear your servant’s prayer as I am today praying before you day and night for your servants the sons of Israel and acknowledging the sins of the sons of Israel, that we have sinned against you
I and my family have sinned; 7 we have treated you badly and not kept your commandments and usages and laws which you enjoined on your servant Moses.
8 Remember the word you charged your servant Moses with: ‘You will be disloyal
I will scatter you among the peoples; 9 and you will come back to me and keep my commandments and live up to them
if your exile be at the edge of the sky, from there I will gather you and bring you to the place I choose to install my name there.’ 10 And those are your servants and your people, whom you redeemed by your great power and strong hand.
11 Ah, Lord, let your ears be attentive to your servant’s prayer and to the prayer of your servants who find pleasure in fearing your name, and give your servant success today and make him an object of sympathy to this man” (I was a cupbearer of the king’s).
2:1-20
2 And in the month of Nisan of the year twenty of King Artaxerxes he had wine before him, and I took up the wine and gave it to the king.
And I had not been sad before him; 2 and the king said to me “How comes your face to be sad, when you are not sick? this is nothing else but a heart sadness.”
And I was very much afraid, 3 but said to the king “May the king live forever
how should my face not be sad when the city, the burial-place of my fathers, is lying waste and its gates have been burned down?”
4 And the king said to me “What is it you want to ask for?”
And I prayed to the God of heaven 5 and said to the king “If the king thinks best and if you hold your servant in esteem, that you would send me to Jerusalem, to the city of my fathers’ graves, to rebuild it.”
6 And the king said to me, while my lady was sitting beside him, “In how long would you go and when would you be back?”
And the king approved and sent me; and I set him a date.
7 And I said to the king “If the king thinks best, let me be given letters to the governors of Trans-Euphrates to pass me through till I come to Judah, 8 and a letter to Asaph the king’s forester to give me timber for constructing the citadel gates for the house and for the wall of the city and for the house I am to occupy”; and the king gave me these, in accordance with God’s kindly hand upon me.
9 And I came to the governors of Trans-Euphrates and gave them the king’s letters; and the king sent with me army officers and cavalry.
10 And Sanballat the Horonite and Tobijah the ʽAmmonite slave heard of it and took it very hard that somebody had come to attempt something good for the sons of Israel.
11 And I came to Jerusalem and was there three days; 12 and I rose in the night, I and a few men with me (I had not told anybody what God had put it into my heart to do for Jerusalem), but had no beast with me except the beast I rode on.
13 And I went out by the Valley Gate in the night to the front of the Dragon Spring and to the Dump Gate, and kept inspecting the walls of Jerusalem, how they were broken and its gates had been burned down.
14 And I went over to the Spring Gate and to the King’s Reservoir, and there was no way for the beast to get over with me on its back.
15 And I kept on up the Arroyo in the night, and kept inspecting the wall; and I came back and went in by the Valley Gate, and home; 16 and the men on guard did not know where I had gone and what I was doing, and thus far I had not told the Judahites and the priests and the nobles and the magnates and the rest of the administrators.
17 And I said to them “You see for yourselves the bad state we are in, how Jerusalem is lying waste and its gates have been burned down.
Come on, let us rebuild the wall of Jerusalem and not be a butt for insults any longer”; 18 and I told them of God’s hand, how it had rested kindly on me, and all the words of the king, what he had said to me; and they said “Let us stand up and build,” and took heart for the good cause.
19 And Sanballat the Horonite and Tobijah the ʽAmmonite slave and Gusham the Arab heard of it and made fun of us and treated us contemptuously, and said “What’s that you are doing? rebelling against the king?” 20 But I gave them their answer, “The God of heaven himself will make us successful, and we his worshipers will stand up and build; but you have no share nor right nor memories in Jerusalem.”
Nehemiah
3:1-32
3 And High Priest Eljashib and his brother priests stood up and built the Sheep Gate
it was they who performed the ceremonies for it and hung the gates in the building
and to the Hundred Tower, performed the ceremonies for it, to Hananel’s Tower.
2 And next the men of Jericho built.
And next Zaccur the son of Imri built.
3 And the Fish Gate the sons of the Senaah built; it was they who framed the gateway and hung the gates in it and put in place the sockets for the bars, and the bars.
4 And next Meremoth the son of Urijah the son of Hakkos repaired. And next Meshullam the son of Berekiah the son of Meshezabel repaired.
And next Sadok the son of Baʽana repaired.
5 And next the Tekoʽites repaired; but their grandees did not bring their necks into their Lord’s service. 6 And the Old-Town Gate Jojadaʽ the son of Paseah and Meshullam the son of Besodiah repaired; it was they who framed the gateway and hung the gates in it and put in place the sockets for the bars, and the bars.
8 Next ʽUzziel the son of Harhiah, goldsmiths, repaired.
And next Hananiah the son of the perfumers repaired.
And they stoned up Jerusalem to the Broad Wall. 9 And next Rephajah the son of Hur, chief of half the department of Jerusalem, repaired.
10 And next Jedajah the son of Harumaph repaired opposite his house. And next Hattush the son of Hashabnejah repaired.
11 Malkijah the son of Harim and Hasshub the son of Pahath Moab repaired a second assignment, and the Baking-Crock Tower.
12 And next Shallum the son of Hallohesh, chief of half the department of Jerusalem, he and his daughters, repaired.
13 The Valley Gate Hanun and the inhabitants of Zanoah repaired; it was they who built it and hung the gates in the building and put in place the sockets for the bars, and the bars; and five hundred yards to the Dump Gate.
14 And the Dump Gate Malkijah the son of Recab, chief of the department of Beth-hak-Kerem, repaired; it was he who built it and hung the gates in the building and put in place the sockets for the bars, and the bars.
15 And the Spring Gate Shallun the son of Col-Hozeh, chief of the department of Mispah, repaired; it was he who built it and canopied it and hung the gates in the building and put in place the sockets for the bars, and the bars; and the wall by the Tunnel Reservoir at the King’s Garden and to the stairs that go down from David’s City.
16 After him Nehemiah the son of ʽAzbuk, chief of half the department of Beth-Sur, repaired to opposite David’s Graves and to the Artificial Reservoir and to the Champions’ House.
17 After him the Levites repaired, Rehum the son of Bani.
After him Hashabiah, chief of half the department of Keilah, repaired for his department.
18 After him their brothers repaired, Bavvai the son of Henadad, chief of half the department of Keilah.
19 And ʽEzer the son of Jeshuaʽ, chief of Mispah, next repaired a second assignment, opposite the armory stairs at the angle.
20 After him Baruc the son of Zabbai repaired a second assignment from the angle to the door of High Priest Eljashib’s house.
21 After him Meremoth the son of Urijah the son of Hakkos repaired a second assignment, from the door of Eljashib’s house all along Eljashib’s house.
22 And after him the priests repaired, the men of the Pale.
23 After them Benjamin and Hasshub repaired opposite their house.
After them ʽAzariah the son of Maʽasejah the son of ʽAnaniah repaired alongside his house.
24 After him Binnui the son of Henadad repaired a second assignment, from ʽAzariah’s house to the angle and to the corner.
25 Palal the son of Uzai from opposite the angle and the tower that bulges out from the upper royal palace with the court of the guard.
After him Pedajah the son of Pareosh.
26 And the temple servants lived on the castle ridge to opposite the Eastern Water Gate and the bulging-out tower.
27 After him the Tekoʽites repaired a second assignment, from opposite the great bulging-out tower to the wall of the castle ridge.
28 Above the Pony Gate the priests repaired, each opposite his own house.
29 After it Sadok the son of Immer repaired opposite his house, and after him Shemaʽiah the son of Shecaniah, the warder of the East Gate; 30 after him Hananiah the son of Shelemiah and Hanun the sixth son of Salaph a second assignment; after him Meshullam the son of Berekiah repaired opposite his vestry.
31 After him Malkijah the son of the goldsmith repaired to the house of the temple servants and the traders, opposite the Assigned Tract Gate, and to the upper room on the corner.
32 And between the upper room on the corner and the Sheep Gate the goldsmiths and the traders repaired.
4:1-23
6 But we built the wall, and the whole wall was connected halfway up, because the people’s hearts were in the work.
9 But we prayed to our God, and set a watch against them day and night, because of them.
15 And when our enemies had heard that we had learned of it and God had balked their scheme, we all went back to the wall, each to his work.
Nehemiah 5:1-19
5 And there arose a great outcry of the people and their wives against their brother Judahites; 2 and there were some who said “We are pawning our sons and daughters to get grain to eat to keep ourselves alive”; 3 and there were some who said “We are pawning our fields and vineyards to get grain in the famine”; 4 and there were some who said “We have borrowed money on our fields and vineyards for the king’s taxes.
5 And now our flesh is like our brothers’ flesh, our sons like theirs, and here we are reducing our sons and daughters to slavery, and some of our daughters have been enslaved, and we are helpless; and the aristocrats have our fields and vineyards.”
6 And I was very angry when I heard their outcry and these words, 7 and I followed my impulse and came down on the aristocrats and magnates and said to them “You are taking usury of your brothers”; and I held a great assembly about them, 8 and said to them “We have been buying up our brother Judahites who had been sold to, the heathens, as much as we could, and you are even selling your brothers and they get sold to us”; and they were silent and could not find a word.
9 And I said “The thing you are doing is not good; will you not go in the fear of God on account of taunts from our heathen enemies? 10 And I too, my brothers and my men, are charging them interest in money and grain; let us leave off this interest-taking; 11 return to them at once their fields, vineyards, olive-trees, and houses, and the percent of money and grain and grape-juice and oil that you are charging them.” 12 And they said “We will return these and not try to get them; we will do just as you say”; and I, called the priests and swore them to do as they said; 13 I also shook out the bosom of my robe and said “So may God shake out from his house and his goods every man who does not make good this word, and so may he be shaken out and empty”; and all the assembly said “Amen” and praised Jehovah; and the people lived up to this word.
14 Besides, from the day when he commissioned me to be governor in Judah, from the year twenty to the year thirty-two of King Artaxerxes, twelve years, I and my brothers did not live at public expense.
15 But the former governors, the ones before me, had burdened the people and taken from them in bread and wine the equivalent of forty shekels of silver; their men too lorded it over the people; but I did not do thus, on account of the fear of God.
16 And I also took hold in this work of the wall; and we bought no land, but all my men were gathered there at the wall.
17 And the Judahites and the magnates, a hundred and fifty men, and those who came to us from the nations around us, ate at my table; 18 and what was done for one day was one head of beef cattle, six select sheep or goats, and birds were done for me, and every ten days numerous skins of wine; and with this I did not take the public allowance, because the servitude was heavy on the people.
19 Remember for me for good, my God, all that I did for this people.
6:1-19
6 And when the report came to Sanballat and Tobijah, and Gusham the Arab and the rest of our enemies, that I had built the wall and there were no breaches left in it (even up to that time I had not hung gates in the gateways), 2 Sanballat and Gusham sent word to me “Come, let us make an appointment for an interview in the villages on the Ono plain”
and they were planning to do me harm. 3 But I sent messengers to them with the word “I am doing a great piece of work and cannot go down; why should the work come to a stop while I take time off and go down to you?” 4 And they sent me this same word four times, and I gave them this same answer.
5 And Sanballat sent his man to me a fifth time on this same errand with an open letter in his hand 6 in which was written “There is a report among the nations, and Gushmu says, you and the Judahites are planning to rebel; that is why you are building the wall; and they are going to have you for king”; things of this sort.
7 “And you have also set up prophets to proclaim about you in Jerusalem ‘There is a king in Judah’; and now the report will come to the king”
things of this sort.
“Now come on, let us talk it over.” 8 But I sent them word “There are no such facts as you say, but you are inventing them out of your own head.” 9 For they were all scaring us, thinking “Get them discouraged from the work, and it will not be done.”
But as it was, he braced up my determination.
10 And I had gone into the house of Shemaʽiah the son of Delajah the son of Mehetabel, he being debarred, and he said “Let us make an appointment to meet in God’s house, in the interior of the temple, and shut the temple doors, because there are people coming in to kill you, coming in in the night to kill you.” 11 But I said “Is a man in my position to play the fugitive? and who in my position would go into the temple for his life?
I will not go in.” 12 And I recognized it was not God that sent him, that he uttered the prophecy against me, but Tobijah and Sanballat had hired him 13 in order that I might be scared into doing so and sinning, and they might have it as a scandal to taunt me with.
14 My God, remember Tobijah and Sanballat suitably to these deeds of his, and also Noʽadiah the prophetess and the rest of the prophets who were scaring me.
15 And the wall was finished on the twenty-fifth of Elul, in fifty-two days.
16 And when all our enemies heard of it and all the nations around us saw it, they felt themselves decidedly set down and knew that the doing of this work came from our God.
17 Besides, in those days the aristocrats of Judah had many of their letters going to Tobijah and Tobijah’s coming to them; 18 for many in Judah were sworn to him because he was son-in-law to Shecaniah the son of Arah and his son Jehohanan had married the daughter of Meshullam the son of Berekiah.
19 They also kept talking of his good points before me and carrying my words to him.
And Tobijah sent letters to scare me.
7:1-73
6 “These are the sons of the province, those who came up out of the serfdom of the deportees whom King Nebucadnessar of Babylon had deported to Babylon and came back to Jerusalem and Judah, each to his city, 7 who came with Zerubbabel, Jeshuaʽ, Nehemiah, Serajah, Raghamiah, Nahamani, Mordocai, Bishlan, Masparath, Bigvai, Rehum, Baʽanah.
43 “The Levites: the sons of Jeshuaʽ and Kadmiel, of the sons of Hodaviah, seventy-four.
44 “The singers: the sons of Asaph, a hundred and twenty-eight.
45 “The gatemen: the sons of Shallum, the sons of Ater, the sons of Talmon, the sons of Akkub, the sons of Hatita, the sons of Shobai, total a hundred and thirty-nine.
57 “The sons of Solomon’s servants: the sons of Sotai, the sons of the Sophereth, the sons of Peruda, 58 the sons of Jaʽalah, the sons of Darkon, the sons of Giddel, 59 the sons of Shephatiah, the sons of Hattil, the sons of Pokereth Hassebajim, the sons of Amon.
60 Total of temple servants and sons of Solomon’s servants, three hundred and ninety-two.
61 “And these are those who came up from Tel Melah, Tel Harsha, Kerub, Addan, Immer, and could not state their families and their blood, whether they belonged to Israel: 62 the sons of Delajah, the sons of Tobijah, the sons of Nekoda, six hundred and fifty-two.
63 “And of the priests the sons of Habajah, the sons of Hakkos, the sons of Barzillai who married one of the descendants of Barzillai the Gileadite and took their name, 64
the registrars looked for the record of these, and they were not to be found; and they were disqualified from priestly functions, 65 and the Tarshata told them they were not to eat any of the holiest of the holy till there should stand a priest with the gift of Urim and Thummim.
66 “The whole assembly as a unit came to forty-two thousand three hundred and sixty, 67 besides their slaves; of these, men and women, there were seven thousand three hundred and thirty-seven; and they had two hundred singers, men and women.
68 And of their ponies there were seven hundred and thirty-six, of their mules two hundred and forty-five, 69 of their camels four hundred and thirty-five, of donkeys six thousand seven hundred and twenty.
70 7:69 “And some of the number of the heads of families gave for the work: the Tarshata gave to the treasury a thousand drachmas of gold, fifty bowls, five hundred and thirty priests’ tunics.
71 7:70 And some of the heads of families gave to the treasury of the work twenty thousand drachmas of gold and twenty-two hundred minas of silver.
72 7:71 And what the rest of the people gave was twenty thousand drachmas of gold and two thousand minas of silver, and sixty-seven priests’ tunics.
73 7:72 “And the priests and the Levites and part of the people settled in Jerusalem and in the country, and the singers and the gatemen and the temple servants in their cities, and all Israel in their cities.”
And the seventh month drew on, with the sons of Israel in their cities, Nehemiah 8:1-18
8 and all the people to a man came together in the square before the Water Gate and told ʽEzra the scribe to bring the book of Moses’s code which Jehovah had enjoined on Israel.
8 And he read from the book of God’s code by sections, bringing out the sense, and they expounded the text.
9 And the Tarshata and Priest ʽEzra the scribe and the Levites who were expounding to the people said to all the people “The day is sacred to your God Jehovah; do not mourn nor weep”
for all the people were weeping as they heard the words of the code.
For the sons of Israel had never done so since the days of Joshuaʽ the son of Nun until that day.
And there was a very great merrymaking.
9:1-38
9 And on the twenty-fourth day of this month the sons of Israel came together with fasting and in sackcloths and with earth on them, 2 and the descendants of Israel separated themselves from all foreigners and stood and confessed their sins and the guilts of their fathers.
3 And they stood up in their places, and they read from the book of their God Jehovah’s code a quarter of the day, and a quarter they were confessing and doing reverence to their God Jehovah.
4 And Jeshuaʽ and Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani, Kanani, stood up on the Levites’ platform, and they cried out in a loud voice to their God Jehovah.
5 And the Levites Jeshuaʽ and Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabnejah, Sherebiah, Hodijah, Shebaniah, Pethahiah, said
“Stand up, bless your God Jehovah, and let them bless your name, glorious and exalted above all blessing and praise!
6 “You it was, Jehovah, you alone, that made the sky, the sky of the sky, and all its legions, the earth and everything on it, the seas and everything in them, and you give life to them all, and the legions of the sky do reverence to you.
7 You it was, Jehovah God, that called Abram and brought him out of Ur of the Chaldeans and named him Abraham, 8 and found his heart loyal before you and made a covenant with him to give the country of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Amorites, and the Perizzites and the Jebusites and the Girgashites to his descendants, and made good your words because you are a doer of right.
9 “And you saw the wretched state of our fathers in Egypt, and heard their cry at the Red Sea, 10 and dealt out tokens and miracles upon the Pharaoh and all his officers and all the people of his country because you knew they had been arrogant against them, and you made yourself famous as at this day.
11 And you split the sea apart before them, and took them across through the middle of the sea on dry land, and threw their pursuers into depths of ooze like a stone into a mighty water; 12 and you led them by a pillar of cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night to light up for them the road they were to go on.
13 And on Mount Sinai you came down and spoke with them out of the sky and gave them correct laws and true rulings, good institutions and commandments, 14 and made known to them your holy sabbath, and enjoined on them commandments and institutions and rulings through your servant Moses, 15 and gave them bread out of the sky for their hunger and brought them out water from a crag for their thirst, and told them to go in to take possession of the country you had pledged yourself to give to them.
16 “But they, our fathers, were headstrong and stiffened up their necks and did not listen to your commandments; 17 and they refused to listen, and did not remember your wonders that you had done in their presence, but stiffened up their necks and elected a chief to go back to their slavery in Egypt.
But you are a God of forgiveness, kindly and tenderhearted, patient and very friendly, and did not abandon them, 18 even when they made themselves a metal calf and said ‘This is your God that brought you up out of Egypt’ and committed acts of great contumely; 19 you in your great tenderheartedness did not abandon them in the wilderness: the pillar of cloud never left its place over them by day, guiding them on the road, and the pillar of fire by night to light up for them the road they were to go on; 20 and you gave your good Spirit to enlighten them, and did not withhold your manna from their mouths, and gave them water for their thirst, 21 and for forty years you supported them in the wilderness: they were in want of nothing; their clothes did not wear out and their feet did not swell.
22 “And you gave them kingdoms and peoples and allotted them for frontier, and they took possession of the country of King Sihon of Heshbon and the country of King ‘Og of the Bashan.
23 And you made their sons numerous as the stars in the sky, and brought them into the country you had told their fathers to go into to take possession.
24 And the sons went in and took possession of the country, and you humbled before them the inhabitants of the country, the Canaanites, and gave them into their hands, and their kings and the peoples of the country, to do as they pleased with.
25 And they took fortified cities and fat soil, and got possession of houses full of good things, rock-hewn cisterns, vineyards and olive-trees and fruit-trees in great numbers, and they ate and had their fill and grew fat and lived in luxury by your great goodness.
26 “But they were disobedient and rebelled against you and threw your code behind their backs, and killed your prophets who had testified to them to bring them back to you, and committed acts of great contumely; and you gave them into the hands of their foes and they distressed them.
27 And in their distress they would cry out to you, and you in heaven would hear and, in accordance with your great tenderheartedness, would give them saviors who saved them out of the hands of their foes.
28 But when they were at rest they would go back to doing bad things before you, and you left them in their enemies’ hands and they had them at their mercy; and they went back to crying out to you, and you in heaven would hear and, in accordance with your great tenderheartedness, would deliver them.
29 And you testified to them to bring them back to your code; but they were headstrong and did not listen to your commands and sinned against your laws, which men should conform to and have life by them, and turned a stubborn shoulder and stiffened up their necks and did not listen.
30 And you kept on with them many years, and testified to them by your Spirit through your prophets, but they did not give ear, and you gave them into the hands of the peoples of the countries.
31 But in your great tenderness you did not finish them off nor abandon them, because you are a kindly and tenderhearted Deity.
32 “And now, our God, great and invincible and terrible Deity, keeper of covenant and friendship, let all the hard experience we have had, we, our kings and our generals and our priests and our prophets and our fathers and all your people, from the days of the kings of Assyria to this day, not be a little thing before you.
33 And you are in the right as to all that has come upon us, because you have done loyally; and we are in the wrong.
34 And our kings, our generals, our priests, and our fathers did not live up to your code nor listen to your commandments and your testimonies that you gave them; 35 but they, in their independent sovereignty and in your abundant good things that you gave them and in the broad and fat country that you put before them, did not serve you nor turn back from their bad practices.
36 Here we are in servitude today; and as to the country you gave to our fathers to eat the fruits of and the good things of, here we are in servitude in it, 37 and it is bearing its produce in great crops for the kings you have put over us for our sins, and they are ruling over our bodies and our cattle as they please, and we are in great distress.”
38 “And for all this we agree to a schedule and write it down; and on the sealed copy are our chiefs, our Levites, our priests.”
Nehemiah 10:1-39
10 And on the sealed copies “Nehemiah the Tarshata the son of Hacaliah, and Sidkijah; 2 Serajah, ʽAzariah, Jeremiah, 3 Pashhur, Amariah, Malkijah, 4 Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluc, 5 Harim, Meremoth, ʽObadiah, 6 Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruc, 7 Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin, 8 Maʽaziah, Bilgai, Shemaʽiah; these are the priests; 9 and the Levites, Jeshuaʽ the son of Azaniah, Binnui, of the sons of Henadad Kadmiel, 10 and their brothers She[b]aniah, Hodaviah, Kelita, Pelajah, Hanan, 11 Mica, Rehob, Hashabiah, 12 Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah, 13 Hodijah, Bani, Beninu; 14 heads of the people, Pareosh, Pahath Moab, ʽElam, Zattu, Bani, 15 Bunni, ʽAzgad, Bebai, 16 Adonijah, Bigvai, Ghadin, 17 Ater, Hizkijah, ʽAzzur, 18 Hodijah, Hashum, Besai, 19 Hariph, ʽAnathoth, Nobai, 20 Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir, 21 Meshezabel, Sadok, Jadduaʽ, 22 Pelatiah, Hanan, ʽAnajah, 23 Hosheaʽ, Hananiah, Hasshub, 24 Hallohesh, Pilha, Shobek, 25 Rehum, Hashabnah, Maʽasejah, 26 and Ahijah, Hanan, ʽAnan, 27 Malluc, Harim, Baʽanah.”
28 “And the remainder of the people, the priests, the Levites, the gatemen, the singers, the temple servants, and everybody who has separated himself from the peoples of the countries to God’s code, their wives, their sons, and their daughters, everybody that knows enough to understand, 29 concur with their brothers, their notables, and take upon themselves an imprecation and an oath to go by God’s code which was given through God’s servant Moses and to observe and live up to all the commandments of our Lord Jehovah and his laws and usages; 30 and that we will not give our daughters to the peoples of the country nor take their daughters for our sons; 31 and from the peoples of the country who bring commodities and provisions of any kind on the sabbath day to sell we will not take any on the sabbath or on a holy day; and we will give up enforcing claims on goods in anybody’s hands in the seventh year.
39 For it is into the vestries that the sons of Israel and the sons of Levi are to bring in the contribution of grain and grape-juice and oil, and there the belongings of the sanctuary and the officiating priests and the gatemen and the singers are.
And we will not abandon our God’s house.”
11:1-36
11 And the chiefs of the people lived in Jerusalem, and the remainder of the people cast lots to bring in one out of ten to live in Jerusalem, the sacred city, and ten parts in the cities.
2 And the people blessed all the men who volunteered to live in Jerusalem.
3 And these are the heads of the province who lived in Jerusalem; and in the cities of Judah Israel, the priests, and the Levites, and the temple servants, and the sons of Solomon’s servants, lived each on his own holding in their cities.
4 And there lived in Jerusalem, of the sons of Judah and of the sons of Benjamin,
Of the sons of Judah: Ghathajah the son of ʽUzzijah the son of Zecariah the son of Amariah the son of Shephatiah the son of Mahalalel a son of Peres, 5 and Maʽasejah the son of Baruc the son of Col-Hozeh the son of Hazajah the son of ʽAdajah the son of Jojarib the son of Zecariah the son of the Shelanite.
6 Of all the sons of Peres who lived in Jerusalem there were four hundred and sixty-eight able-bodied men.
7 And these were the sons of Benjamin: Sallu the son of Meshullam the son of Joʽed the son of Pedajah the son of Kolajah the son of Maʽasejah the son of Ithiel the son of Jeshaʽiah, 8 and after him Gabbai, Sallai, nine hundred and twenty-eight; 9 and Joel the son of Zicri had the oversight over them, and Jehudah the son of Hassenuah over the city as second.
10 Of the priests: Jedaʽiah, Jojarib, Jakin, 11 Serajah the son of Hilkijah the son of Meshullam the son of Sadok the son of Merajoth the son of Ahitub the warden of God’s house, 12 and their brothers who did the, work of God’s house, eight hundred and twenty-two, and ʽAdajah the son of Jeroham the son of Pelaliah the son of Amsi the son of Zecariah the son of Pashhur the son of Malkijah, 13 and his brothers, two hundred and forty-two heads of families; and ʽAmasai the son of ʽAzarel the son of Ahzai the son of Meshillemoth the son of Immer, 14 and his brothers, a hundred and twenty-eight stalwart men; and Zabdiel the son of Haggedolim had the oversight over them.
15 And of the Levites: Shemaʽiah the son of Hasshub the son of ʽAzrikam the son of Hashabiah the son of Bunni; 16 and Shabbethai and Jozabad, over the work outside the house of God, of heads of Levites.
17 And Mattaniah the son of Micah the son of Zabdi the son of Asaph, head of the beginning, spoke the thanks in the prayer; and Bakbukiah was second of his brothers; and ʽAbda the son of Shammuaʽ the son of Galal the son of Jeduthun.
18 Of all the Levites in the sacred city there were two hundred and eighty-four.
19 And the gatemen: ʽAkkub, Talmon, and their brothers who guarded the gates, a hundred and seventy-two.
20 And the remainder of Israel, the priests, the Levites, were in all the cities of Judah, each on his estate.
21 And the temple servants lived on the castle ridge, and Siha and Gishpa were over the temple servants.
22 And ʽUzzi the son of Bani the son of Hashabiah the son of Mattaniah the son of Mica, of the sons of Asaph, the singers, had they oversight over the Levites in Jerusalem with reference to the business of God’s house.
23 For the king’s command governed them, and there was a schedule for the singers, and appointment for each day.
24 And Pethahiah the son of Meshezabel, of the sons of Zerah the son of Judah, was court agent for every affair for the people.
25 And toward the villages in their country districts, sons of Judah lived in Kirjath-ha-Arbogh and its dependencies, and in Dibon and its dependencies, and in Jekabseel and its villages, 26 and in Jeshuaʽ, and in Moladah, and in Beth-Pelet, 27 and in Hasar-Shuʽal, and in Beer-Shebaʽ and its dependencies, 28 and in Siklag, and in Meconah and in its dependencies, 29 and in ʽEn-Rimmon, and in Soreah, and in Jarmuth, 30 Zanoah, ʽAdullam, and their villages, Lakish and its country districts, ʽAzekah and its dependencies, and were camped from Beer-Shebaʽ to Hinnom’s Valley.
31 And the sons of Benjamin, from Gebaʽ, Micmas and Ghaijah and Bethel and its dependencies, 32 ʽAnathoth, Nob, ʽAnaniah, 33 Hasor, Ramah, Gittaim, 34 Hadid, Seboʽim, Neballat, 35 Lod and Ono, the Carpenters’ Valley.
36 And of the Levites some Judah divisions were placed with Benjamin.
12:1-47
12 And these are the priests and Levites who came up with Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel and Jeshuaʽ: Serajah, Jeremiah, ʽEzra, 2 Amariah, Malluc, Hattush, 3 Shecaniah, Rehum, Meremoth, 4 ʽIddo, Ginnethon, Abijah, 5 Mijamin, Maʽadiah, Bilgah, 6 Shemaʽiah and Jojarib, Jedaʽiah, 7 Sallu, ʽAmok, Hilkijah, Jedaʽiah; these were the heads of the priests and their brothers in Jeshuaʽ’s time.
8 And the Levites: Jeshuaʽ, Binnui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Jehudah, Mattaniah (he and his brothers over thanksgivings), 9 and Bakbukiah and ʽUnni, their brothers opposite to them for charges. 10 And Jeshuaʽ had the son Jojakim, and Jojakim had the son Eljashib, and Eljashib the son Jojadaʽ, 11 and Jojadaʽ had the son Jonathan, and Jonathan had the son Jadduaʽ.
12 And in Jojakim’s time were priests, the heads of families, for Serajah, Merajah; for Jeremiah, Hananiah; 13 for ʽEzra, Meshullam; for Amariah, Jehohanan; 14 for Malluc, Jonathan; for Shecaniah, Joseph; 15 for Harim, Ghadna; for Merajoth, Helkai; 16 for ʽIddo, Zecariah; for Ginnethon, Meshullam; 17 for Abijah, Zicri; for Minjamin; for Moʽadiah, Piltai; 18 for Bilgah, Shammuaʽ; for Shemaʽiah, Jehonathan, 19 and for Jojarib, Mattenai; for Jedaʽiah, ʽUzzi; 20 for Sallai, Kallai; for ʽAmok, ʽEber; 21 for Hilkijah, Hashabiah; for Jedaʽiah, Nathanel.
22 The Levites: in the times of Eljashib, Jojadaʽ and Johanan and Jadduaʽ, heads of families were written down, and the priests, to the reign of Darius the Persian. 23 The sons of Levi, the heads of the families, are written in the book of the chronicles down to the time of Johanan the son of Eljashib.
24 And the heads of the Levites were Hashabiah, Sherebiah and Jeshuaʽ and Bani and Kadmiel, and their brothers opposite them to praise, to give thanks, in accordance with the command David the man of God, watch against watch, 25 Mattaniah and Bakbukiah, ʽObadiah; Meshullam, Talmon, ʽAkkub, gatemen keeping watch at the gate storerooms.
30 And the priests and the Levites purified themselves and the people and the gates and the wall.
31 And I brought the chiefs of Judah up above the wall; and I arranged two great thanksgiving companies, and the one went to the right above the wall to the Dump Gate, 32 and behind them went Hoshaʽajah and half the princes of Judah, 33 and ʽAzariah, ʽEzra, and Meshullam, 34 Judah and Benjamin and Shemaʽiah and Jeremiah, 35 and some of the sons of the priests with trumpets; Zecariah the son of Jonathan the son of Shemaʽiah the son of Mattaniah the son of Micajah the son of Zaccur the son of Asaph, 36 and his brothers Shemaʽiah and Azarel, Milalai, Gilalai, Maʽai, Nethanel and Judah, Hanani, with the musical instruments of David the man of God, and ʽEzra the scribe before them.
37 And past the Spring Gate and straight ahead they went up over the stairs of David’s City, up the slope of the wall above David’s house, to the Water Gate on the east.
38 And the second thanksgiving company went to the left, and I behind it, and half the people, above the wall, above the Baking-Crock Tower, to the Broad Wall, 39 and above the Ephraim Gate and past the Old-Town Gate and past the Fish Gate and Hananel’s Tower and the Hundred Tower to the Sheep Gate, and halted at the Guardhouse Gate.
40 And both the thanksgiving companies halted at God’s house, and I and half the magnates with me, 41 and the priests Eljakim, Maʽasejah, Minjamin, Micajah, Eljoʽenai, Zecariah, Hananiah, with trumpets, 42 and Maʽasejah and Shemaʽiah and Eleazar and ʽUzzi and Jehohanan and Malkijah and ʽElam and ʽEzer; and the singers sounded their notes, and Izrahiah had the oversight.
43 And on that day they sacrificed great sacrifices and made merry, because God had gladdened them to a great merrymaking; and the women and children made merry too, and Jerusalem’s merrymaking was heard to a great distance.
44 And on that day officers were appointed over the vestries for the stores, for the contributions, the first things, and the tithes, to collect in them by regions of cities the prescribed portions for the priests and the Levites, because Judah was happy over the priests and Levites in service, 45 and they kept their God’s charge and the charge of the purification, and the singers and the gatemen conformed to the orders of David and his son Solomon, 46 for in the days of David and Asaph of old there were heads of the singers and song of praise and thanks to God; 47 and in Zerubbabel’s days all Israel gave the portions of the singers and the gatemen punctually day by day and set apart consecrations for the Levites, and the Levites set apart consecrations for the sons of Aaron.
13:1-31
13 And on that day there was a public reading to the people out of the book of Moses, and it was found written in it that an ʽAmmonite or Moabite should not come into God’s assembly forever 2 because they did not offer the sons of Israel bread and water, and hired Balaam against them to misspeak them, but our God turned the curse into a blessing.
3 And when they heard the ruling they separated all intruded population from Israel.
4 But earlier than this Priest Eljashib had been in office about the vestries of our God’s house, a connection of Tobijah’s, 5 and he had turned over to him a great vestry where they used to put the grain-offering and the frankincense and the vessels and the tithe of grain and grape-juice and oil, the ordinance for the Levites and singers and gatemen, and the contribution for the priests.
6 But during all this I was not in Jerusalem; for in the year thirty-two of Artaxerxes as king of Babylon I had come in to the king.
And a while later I asked leave from the king, 7 and I came to Jerusalem and learned of the nuisance Eljashib had committed for Tobijah, turning over to him a vestry in the courts of God’s house; 8 and I did not like it at all, and I threw all Tobijah’s household goods outside out of the vestry; 9 and I ordered the vestries cleansed, and I put back there the vessels of God’s house, the meal-offering and frankincense.
10 And I learned that the Levites’ portions had not been given, and the Levites had gone off to their lands, and it was the singers who were doing the work; 11 and I came down on the magnates and said “How comes it that God’s house is abandoned?” and I gathered them and stationed them at their posts.
12 And all Judah brought in the tithe of grain and grape-juice and oil to the storerooms 13 into the hands of Priest Shelemiah, and Scribe Sadok and Pedajah of the Levites, and their assistant Hanan the son of Zaccur the son of Mattaniah, because they were considered reliable; and it was their responsibility to distribute to their brothers.
14 Remember me for this, my God, and do not efface the record of my befriending God’s house and his charge.
15 During that time I saw in Judah people treading winepresses on the sabbath and bringing in the heaps of grain and loading donkeys with it, and also with wine, grapes, and figs, and all sorts of loads, and bringing them to Jerusalem on the sabbath day; and I warned them on the day when they sold provisions.
16 And the Tyrians lived in it, bringing in fish and all kinds of goods and selling on the sabbath to the sons of Judah and in Jerusalem.
17 And I came down on the nobles of Judah and said to them “What is this bad thing you are doing and profaning the sabbath day? 18 was it not so that your fathers did, and our God brought upon us all this disaster, and upon this city? and you are breeding additional wrath against Israel, profaning the sabbath.” 19 And when the gateways of Jerusalem grew shady before the sabbath I ordered the gates closed, and that they should not be opened till after the sabbath, and I stationed men of my own at the gates; no load was to come in on the sabbath day.
20 And the traders and those who had goods to sell put up outside Jerusalem a time or two; 21 and I warned them and said to them “How is it you are putting up in front of the wall? if you do it another time I will lay hands on you.”
From that time on they did not come on the sabbath.
22 And I told the Levites to be purified and in, watching the gates, to maintain the sanctity of the sabbath day.
Remember this too for me, my God, and spare me in accordance with the greatness of your friendship.
23 During that time I also saw the Judahites who had taken in Ashdodite, ʽAmmonite, and Moabite wives; 24 and their sons half of them talked Ashdodite and did not know how to talk Judaic, and so in the language of each people.
25 And I came down on them and beat some of them and pulled out their beards, and swore them by God “not to give your daughters to their sons and not to take their daughters for your sons and yourselves; 26 was it not over these that King Solomon of Israel went wrong? and among the nations, many as they were, there had never been a king like him, and he was loved by his God, and God set him as king over all Israel; even him the foreign wives seduced into sin.
27 And is it not an unheard-of thing for you to do all this great evil, being unfaithful to our God, taking in foreign wives?”
28 And one of the sons of Jojadaʽ the son of High Priest Eljashib had married into the family of Sanballat the Horonite; and I drove him off. 29 Remember them, my God, for the pollution of the priesthood and the covenant of the priesthood.
30 And the Levites I cleansed from every foreign element.
And I arranged turns of service for the priests and Levites, each at his work, 31 and for the wood donation at stated times, and for the firstfruits. Remember me, my God, for good. Esther 1:1-22
1 And in Xerxes’ days that was the Xerxes who reigned from India to Nubia, a hundred and twenty-seven provinces 2
in those days, when King Xerxes took his seat on his royal throne in Susa Citadel 3 in the year three of his reign, he gave a banquet to all his generals and officers, having before him the troops of Persia and Media, the highest nobles, and the provincial generals, 4 exhibiting his glorious royal wealth and the exquisite magnificence of his greatness for a long time, a hundred and eighty days; 5 and when these days were completed the king gave a banquet to all the people that were to be found in Susa Citadel, great and small, for seven days in the garden court of the royal palace.
6 White muslin and violet cloth was fastened with white linen and purple cords to silver rods and marble columns; couches of gold and silver stood on a floor paved with four colors of marble; 7 and drinks were poured in golden vessels, some vessels different from others, and there was royal wine in abundance in accordance with the king’s custom; 8 and the drinking was on the principle of no compulsion, for the king had given this fundamental order to the head of every department of his household, to do as each man pleased.
9 Queen Vashti also gave a women’s banquet in King Xerxes’ royal residence.
10 On the seventh day, when the king was feeling jolly with wine, he told Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, Vaabagtha, Zethar, and Carcas, the seven eunuchs in attendance before King Xerxes, 11 to bring Queen Vashti before the king in her royal tiara to let the people and the generals see her beauty; for she was handsome.
16 And Memucan said before the king and the princes “Queen Vashti has misbehaved not only against the king but against all the princes and against the people in all King Xerxes’ provinces; 17 for the queen’s story will go out to all women to bring their husbands into contempt with them, when people say ‘King Xerxes ordered Queen Vashti brought before him and she did not come,’ 18 and this day the princesses of Persia and Media, who will have heard the queen’s story, will be saying plenty of contemptuous and exasperating things to all the king’s princes.
19 If the king thinks best, let an official announcement be issued with your sanction and engrossed in the laws of Persia and Media to be permanent, that Vashti shall never come before King Xerxes, and the king shall give her position as queen to a better, 20 so that the king’s sentence that he has executed shall be heard of throughout his realm, great as it is, and all women shall pay honor to their husbands, great and small.”
21 And the king and the princes approved the idea; and the king did as Memucan had proposed, 22 and sent writs to all the king’s provinces, to each province in its own form of writing and to each people in its own language, that every man should be master in his house and talk in his people’s language.
Esther
2:1-23
2 But the king’s pages who were in attendance on him said “Let handsome maiden girls be hunted up for the king, 3 and let the king appoint commissioners in all the provinces of his realm and let them gather every handsome maiden girl to the women’s house in Susa Citadel, into the hands of the king’s eunuch Hegai the guardian of the women, and cleansing-creams be furnished them, 4 and the girl that the king likes best be queen in Vashti’s place.”
And the king approved the idea and did so.
5 There was a certain Jew in Susa Citadel named Mordocai the son of Jair the son of Shimei the son of Kish, a Benjamite, 6 who had been deported from Jerusalem with the deportees that were deported with King Jeconiah of Judah whom King Nebucadnessar of Babylon deported; 7 and he was foster-father to his cousin Hadassah (that is, Esther) because she had no father or mother.
And the girl was shapely and handsome; and at the death of her father and mother Mordocai had adopted her.
8 And when the king’s announcement and his law were heard of, and when many girls were being gathered in Hegai’s hands in Susa Citadel, Esther was taken to the king’s house into the hands of Hegai the guardian of the women.
9 And he liked the girl and was friendly to her, and made haste to give her her cleansing-creams and her rations and to give her the seven choicest maids out of the king’s house, and gave her and her maids preferential treatment in the women’s house.
10 Esther had not told her nationality and lineage, because Mordocai had charged her not to.
11 But every single day Mordocai walked in front of the court of the women’s house to find out how Esther was and what was being done with her.
12 And when each girl’s turn came to go in to King Xerxes at the end of twelve months of the women’s regular treatment (for that was the way their time of cleansing was to be gone through, six months with the oil of myrrh and six months with the spices and the women’s cleansing-creams), 13 the girl went in to the king on these terms: she was given anything that she said, to go in from the women’s house to the king’s house with; 14 in the evening she went in, and in the morning she came back to the women’s house, a second one, into the hands of the king’s eunuch Shaʽashgaz, the guardian of the concubines; she did not go in to the king again unless the king had taken a fancy to her and she was called for by name.
15 But when it came the turn of Esther the daughter of Mordocai’s uncle Abihail, whom he had adopted, to go in to the king, she did not ask for anything but what the king’s eunuch Hegai, the guardian of the women, said; and Esther won the admiration of all who saw her.
16 And Esther was taken to King Xerxes, into his royal residence, in the tenth month, that is the month of Tebeth, in the year seven of his reign.
17 And the king loved Esther better than any of the women, and she won more admiration and favor from him than any of the maidens; and he set a royal tiara on her head and made her queen in Vashti’s place.
18 And the king gave a great banquet to all his generals and officers, the Banquet for Esther, and enacted a suspension of taxation for the provinces, and gave gifts of food in accordance with the king’s custom.
19 And when maidens were being gathered a second time, Mordocai sitting in the king’s gate, 20
Esther was not telling her lineage and nationality, as Mordocai had charged her not to, and Esther did as Mordocai said since she had been in his family as foster-daughter, 21
Esther 3:1-15
But Mordocai did not bow nor do reverence.
3 And the officials in the king’s gate said to Mordocai “How comes it you are going against the king’s orders?” 4 and when they said so to him day by day and he did not listen to them they told Haman, to see whether the position Mordocai had taken would stand.
For he had told them he was a Jew. 5 And Haman saw that Mordocai was not bowing and doing reverence to him; and Haman was filled with ire, 6 and scorned to lay hands on Mordocai alone (for they had told him Mordocai’s nationality), and Haman undertook to root out all the Jews in Xerxes’ empire, Mordocai’s people.
7 In the first month (that is, the month of Nisan) in the year twelve of Xerxes’ reign, they cast pur (that is, the lot) before Haman from day to day and from month to month, and the lot fell on the thirteenth day of the twelfth month (that is, the month of Adar).
8 And Haman said to King Xerxes “There is one people scattered and keeping separate among the peoples in all the provinces of your empire, and their laws are different from those of any people, and they do not comply with the king’s laws; and it does not pay the king to tolerate them.
9 If the king thinks best, let writs be issued to destroy them; and I will turn over ten thousand talents of silver into the hands of the administrators to put into the royal treasury.”
10 And the king took his ring off his hand and gave it to Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the Jews’ assailant; 11 and the king said to Haman “The silver is given to you, and so is the people, to do as you think best with.”
13 And there was sending of writs by couriers to all the king’s provinces to kill and destroy and root out all the Jews from boy to old man, children and women, on one day, on the thirteenth of the twelfth month (that is, the month of Adar), and to take their plunder.
14 A copy of the document, to be promulgated as law in each and every province, was publicly displayed to all the peoples, that they be ready on this day.
15 The couriers went out posthaste by royal order, and the law was promulgated in Susa Citadel, and the king and Haman sat down to drink; and the city of Susa was in confusion.
Esther
4:1-17
4 And Mordocai, finding out all that had been done, tore his clothes and put on a sackcloth and ashes and went out through the middle of the city giving a loud and bitter cry.
2 And he came in front of the king’s gate (for there was no going into the king’s gate in sackcloth costume).
3
And in each and every province in the place where the king’s word and law arrived there was great mourning of the Jews, and fasting and weeping and wailing, and sackcloth and ashes were spread for most of them. 4
And Esther’s maids and eunuchs came in and told her; and the queen was quite horrified and sent clothing to dress Mordocai and get his sackcloth off him, but he would not receive it.
5 And Esther called Hathac, one of the king’s eunuchs whom he had set to wait on her, and gave him an errand to Mordocai to find out what was the story and why.
6 And Hathac went out to Mordocai in the city square in front of the king’s gate, 7 and Mordocai told him everything that had happened to him and the details about the money Haman had said he would turn over to the royal treasury for the Jews, to have them destroyed, 8 and gave him a copy of the engrossed law that had been promulgated in Susa to root them out, which he was to show to Esther and tell her of, and to charge her to go in to the king and supplicate him and intercede with him for her people.
9 And Hathac went in and told Esther what Mordocai said.
10 But Esther said to Hathac and ordered him to tell Mordocai 11 “All the king’s household and the people of the king’s provinces know that for any man or woman who goes in to the king in the inner court uninvited the law is uniform to put him to death except for the one to whom the king holds out the golden scepter to grant him life; but I have not been summoned in to the king these thirty days”; 12 and he told Mordocai what Esther said.
13 But Mordocai told him to take back to Esther the word “Do not imagine that you in the king’s house will get away with your life any more than all the Jews.
14 For if you do keep silence at this time, relief and deliverance for the Jews will present itself from elsewhere, but you and your family will perish.
And who knows if it was for an occasion like this that you came to queenhood?”
15 And Esther told him to take back word to Mordocai 16 “Go gather all the Jews that are to be found in Susa and fast for me, and do not eat nor drink for three days, night and day; I and my maids will fast in the same way too; and with that I will go in to the king, which is not according to law, and when I perish I perish.” 17 And Mordocai went along and did just as Esther ordered him to.
5:1-14
5 And on the third day Esther put on royal robes and stood in the inner court of the king’s house opposite the king’s house, while the king was sitting on his royal throne in the royal house opposite the door of the house.
2 And when the king saw Queen Esther standing in the court he admired her; and the king held out for Esther the golden scepter he had in his hand, and Esther came up and touched the head of the scepter.
3 And the king said to her “What is the matter, Queen Esther? what is the boon you want? up to half the empire, it shall be given you.”
4 And Esther said “If the king thinks best, let the king and Haman come today to the banquet I have got up for him.”
5 And the king said “Hurry up with Haman to do as Esther says.” And the king and Haman went in to the banquet Esther had got up.
6 And the king said to Esther over the wine “What have you to ask for? it shall be given you; what is the boon you want? up to half the empire, it shall be given you.”
7 And Esther answered “What I have to ask for, and the boon I want, is
please, 8 if the king thinks best to give what I have to ask for and to take action for the boon I want, let the king and Haman come to the banquet I have got up, and tomorrow I will do as the king says.”
9 And Haman went out merry and jolly that day; but when Haman saw Mordocai in the king’s gate and he did not stand up nor tremble for him, Haman was filled with ire at Mordocai.
10 But Haman repressed his feelings, and went into his house and sent for his intimate friends and his wife Zeresh; 11 and Haman gave them an account of his imposing wealth and the number of his sons, and all that the king had done in making him a great man and elevating him above the princes and officials; 12 and Haman said “Besides, Queen Esther did not let in with the king to the banquet she had got up anybody but me; and tomorrow too I am invited to her with the king.
13 But all this does me no good anytime I see the Jew Mordocai sitting in the king’s gate.”
14 And his wife Zeresh and all his intimate friends said to him “Have them make a stake seventy feet high, and in the morning tell the king to have them impale Mordocai on it, and go in merrily with the king to the banquet.”
And Haman liked the idea and made the stake.
6:1-14
6 That night the king’s sleep would not come, and he ordered the book of history brought, the chronicles, and they were being read before him.
2 And it was found set down that Mordocai had reported about the king’s eunuchs Bigthana and Teresh, two of the guardians of the threshold, who had proposed to lay hands on King Xerxes.
3 And the king said “What honor and distinction was shown to Mordocai for this?”
And the pages in attendance on the king said “Nothing was done about him.” 4 And the king said “Who is in the court?”
And Haman had come to the outer court of the king’s house to tell the king to impale Mordocai on the stake he had got ready for him.
5 And the king’s pages said to him “There is Haman standing in the court.” And the king said “Let him come in.”
6 And Haman came in, and the king said to him “What should be done for the man the king is pleased to honor?”
And Haman thought to himself “Whom would the king be more pleased to honor than me?” 7 And Haman said to the king “A man the king is pleased to honor 8
let them bring royal robes that the king has worn, and a pony that the king has ridden and on the head of which a royal tiara is set, 9 and give the robes and the pony into the hands of someone of the king’s foremost princes, and let them enrobe the man the king is pleased to honor and take him on the pony through the city square and call out before him ‘This is the way the man the king is pleased to honor is treated.’”
10 And the king said to Haman “Right off, take the robes and the pony as you propose and do so for the Jew Mordocai who sits in the king’s gate; do not omit a point of all you have proposed.”
11 And Haman took the robes and the pony and enrobed Mordocai and gave him the ride through the city square and called out before him “This is the way the man the king is pleased to honor is treated.” 12 And Mordocai went back to the king’s gate; and Haman bolted home mourning and muffling his head.
13 And Haman told his wife Zeresh and all his intimate friends the story of all that had happened to him; and his wise men and his wife Zeresh said to him “If Mordocai, before whom you have begun to fall, comes of the blood of the Jews, you will not be a match for him but are to fall before him.”
14 While they were still talking with him the king’s eunuchs arrived
7:1-10
7 and hurried Haman to the banquet Esther had got up, and the king and Haman went in to drink with Queen Esther.
2 And again on the second day the king said to Esther over the wine “What have you to ask for, Queen Esther? it shall be given you; what is the boon you want? up to half the empire, it shall be done.”
3 And Queen Esther answered “If I am in favor with the king and if the king thinks best, let me be given my life as the thing I ask for and my people as the boon I want; for we have been sold, I and my people, to be killed, destroyed, rooted out.
4 And if it were that we had been sold for slaves I would have kept silence because the suffering would not have been worth troubling the king about.”
5 And King Xerxes said to Queen Esther “Who is this, and where is he, whose heart has excited him to do such a thing?”
6 And Esther said “A hostile and malicious man this wretch Haman.”
7 And the king in the heat of his temper got up from the wine-table into the palace garden, while Haman stood to beg Queen Esther for his life, because he saw that he was in for trouble from the king.
8 And the king came back from the palace garden to the banquet house, and Haman had thrown himself down on the couch Esther was on; and the king said “Even forcing the queen in the house with me?” and as the words came out of the king’s mouth they muffled Haman’s face.
9 And Harbonah, one of the eunuchs, said before the king “Besides, there at Haman’s house stands the seventy-feet-high stake Haman made for Mordocai who spoke out for the king’s good.”
And the king said “Impale him on it”; 10 and they impaled Haman on the stake he had got ready for Mordocai, and the king’s temper went down.
Esther 8:1-17 8 That day King Xerxes gave Queen Esther the house of Haman the Jews’ assailant; and Mordocai came in before the king, because Esther had told what he was to her, 2 and the king took off his ring, of which he had divested Haman, and gave it to Mordocai.
And Esther set Mordocai over Haman’s house.
13 A copy of the document, to be promulgated as law in each and every province, was publicly displayed to all the peoples, that the Jews be ready on this day to take vengeance on their enemies.
14 The couriers, mounted on the government blood-horses, hurried out posthaste by royal order, and the law was promulgated in Susa Citadel.
15 And Mordocai went out from before the king in royal dress of violet and white, with a great gold coronet and a mantle of lawn and purple; and the city of Susa was whooping and making merry; 16 to the Jews came light and gladness and joy and honor.
17 And in each and every province and in each and every city in the place where the king’s word and law arrived there was merrymaking and rejoicing of the Jews, banqueting and festival; and many of the populace turned Jews because dread of the Jews had fallen on them.
9:1-32
5 And the Jews dealt death among all their enemies, cutting down and killing and destroying, and did as they pleased with those who hated them.
6 And in Susa Citadel the Jews killed and destroyed five hundred men; 7 and they killed Parshandatha and Dalphon and Aspatha 8 and Poratha and Adalja and Aridatha 9 and Parmashatta and Arisai and Aridai and Vaizatha, 10 the ten sons of Haman the son of Hammedatha, the Jews’ assailant; but they did not lay hands on the plunder.
11 On that day the number of the killed in Susa Citadel came in before the king, 12 and the king said to Queen Esther “In Susa Citadel the Jews have killed and destroyed five hundred men, and Haman’s ten sons; in the remainder of the king’s provinces what will they have done?
And what is it you ask for? it shall be given to you; and what else is the boon you want? it shall be done.”
18 But the Jews in Susa assembled on the thirteenth and fourteenth of it, and rested on the fifteenth of it and kept it as a day of banqueting and merrymaking.
19 That is why the country Jews, those who live in the rural cities, keep the fourteenth day of the month of Adar with merrymaking and banqueting and holiday-making and sending helpings to each other.
And these days are to be commemorated and kept in each and every generation, in each and every clan, in each and every province, and in each and every year; 28 and these Purim days are never to pass away from the midst of the Jews, and their commemoration is never to come to an end out of their descendants.
32 And Esther’s behest ratified these matters of the Purim; and it was put in writing. Esther 10:1-3
10 And King Xerxes laid taxes on all the earth and the islands of the sea.
2 And as to his deeds of might and power, and the details of Mordocai’s greatness which the king bestowed on him, they are recorded in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Media and Persia.
3 For Mordocai the Jew was second to King Xerxes, and a great man of the Jews and popular with the mass of his brothers, aiming at good for his people and speaking peace for all his race.
Job
1:1-22
1 There was a man named Job in the country of ʽUs, and that man was conscientious and upright, fearing God and keeping clear of bad actions.
2 And he had seven sons and three daughters born to him.
3 And his stock was seven thousand sheep and goats and three thousand camels and five hundred yoke of cattle and five hundred donkeys, and a very large body of servants; and that man was the largest proprietor among all the Easterners.
4 And his sons used to go and make a banquet, one day at each one’s house, and invite their three sisters to eat and drink with them; 5 and when the banquet-days had gone the round Job used to send and hallow them, and the first thing in the morning offer a burnt-offering equal in number to all of them, because Job thought “Maybe my sons sinned and cursed God in their hearts.”
Job was doing things like that all the time.
6 And one day the angels came to present themselves before Jehovah, and the Adversary too came among them.
7 And Jehovah said to the Adversary “Where did you come from?”
8 And Jehovah said to the Adversary “Did you take notice of my servant Job? because there is nobody on earth like him, a conscientious and upright man, fearing God and keeping clear of bad actions.”
9 And the Adversary answered Jehovah “Is it for nothing that Job is God-fearing? 10 haven’t you kept up a fence all round him and his family and everything that belongs to him, blessed the work of his hands, and his stock have multiplied in the country? 11 but put out your hand and strike everything that belongs to him and see if he will not curse you to your face.”
12 And Jehovah said to the Adversary “Here, everything that belongs to him is at your disposal; only do not put out your hand to him.”
And the Adversary went out from Jehovah’s presence; 13 and one day when his sons and daughters were eating and drinking wine at their oldest brother’s 14 house a messenger came to Job and said “The cattle were plowing and the donkeys grazing beside them, 15 and the Sheba tribe came down and took them and massacred the men; there was only I that escaped alone to bring you word.” 16 While this one was still speaking the next one came and said “God’s fire fell out of the sky and burned the sheep and goats and the men and ate them up; there was only I that escaped alone to bring you word.” 17 While this one was still speaking the next one came and said “The Chaldeans arranged three columns and raided the camels and took them and massacred the men; there was only I that escaped alone to bring you word.” 18 While this one was still speaking the next one came and said “Your sons and daughters were eating and drinking wine at their oldest brother’s house, 19 and there from across the wilderness came a great wind and hit all four corners of the house, and it fell on the young folks and they are dead; there was only I that escaped alone to bring you word.”
20 And Job stood up and tore his robe and sheared his head, and threw himself on the ground and did reverence 21 and said “Naked I came out of my mother’s body and naked I go back there.
Jehovah gave and Jehovah took. Jehovah’s name be blessed!” 22 With all this Job did not sin nor find fault with Jehovah.
2:1-13
2 And one day the angels came to present themselves before Jehovah, and the Adversary too came among them, and presented himself before Jehovah.
2 And Jehovah said to the Adversary “From where did you come?”
And the Adversary answered Jehovah “From ranging through the earth and walking about in it.”
3 And Jehovah said to the Adversary “Did you take notice of my servant Job? because there is nobody on earth like him, a conscientious and upright man, fearing God and keeping clear of bad actions; and he still holds on to his principles, and you were trying to influence me to wipe him out for nothing.”
4 And the Adversary answered Jehovah “Skin over skin, and over his person a man will give everything he has.
5 But put out your hand and hit his bones and flesh, and see if he will not curse you to your face.”
6 And Jehovah said to the Adversary “Here, he is at your disposal; only look out for his life.”
7 And the Adversary went out from Jehovah’s presence and struck Job with a malignant eruption from foot to crown, 8 and he took a piece of broken crockery to scrape himself with.
And as he sat in the ashes 9 his wife said to him “Are you still holding on to your principles? curse God and die.”
10 But he said to her “You talk as any reprobate would. Are we to accept the good at God’s hands and not accept the bad?”
3:1-26
3 After this Job opened his mouth and cursed his day,
2 and said
3 “Perish the day on which I was to be born, and the night that said ‘A man is conceived’!
4 Be that day darkness; let God not concern himself with it from above and no brightness beam into it.
5 Let darkness and gloom claim it, let clouds settle over it, let eclipses overwhelm it.
6 That night let blackness take; let it not form part of the days of the year nor come into the count of the months.
7 O be that night bleak and bare, let no jubilation come into it;
8 Let day-cursers lay a curse on it, those who are ready to rouse Leviathan.
9 Let its twilight-stars be dark, let it hope for light and there be none,and let it not descry the eyelashes of the dawn,
10 Because it did not shut the doors of the body I was in and shut off torment from my eyes.
11 Why was I not to die in birth, come out of my mother’s body and perish?
12 How came it that knees welcomed me, and breasts for me to suck?
13 For now I should be lying down quiet, asleep and so at rest,
14 With kings and statesmen of earth who built for themselves sites that lie waste
15 Or with generals who owned gold, who filled their houses with silver,
16 Or like an abortion tucked underground I should not exist, like infants that had never seen light.
17 There wicked men forbear to rage, and there exhausted men rest, 18 Prisoners are at ease together, hear no overseer’s voice. 19 Small and great are there, and a slave is free from his owner.
21 Who wait for death and it is not there, and hunt more industriously for it than for buried treasure,
4:1-21
4 And Eliphaz the Temanite answered
2 “Shall we try a word to you? you will be impatient, but who can keep in words?
3 Here you have been schooling many and nerving slack hands;
4 Your words set a stumbling man on his feet and you braced failing knees;
5 Now that it comes to you you are impatient; it touches you and you are disconcerted.
6 Is not your piety your reliance and your conscientious life your hope?
7 Remember: what innocent man has perished, where were upright men annihilated?
8 As I see it, those who plow villainy and sow trouble reap it;
9 They perish by God’s breath, are made an end of by the air from his nostrils.
10 The lion’s roar, the voice of the king of beasts, and the two-year-old lion’s teeth, are broken,
11 The great lion perishes for lack of prey, and the lioness’s cubs lose touch with each other.
12 “And a word once stole upon me, my ear took in a whisper of it,
13 In thoughts brought by night visions when trances fall on men.
14 A terror beset me, and a quaking, and terrified every bone in me,
15 And a breeze ran over my face, made the hair on my flesh prickle up:
16 It stood there, but I could not make out what it looked like; There was a form before my eyes, I heard a hushed voice:
17 ‘Is a human being to be more in the right than God, a man to be cleaner than his Maker?
18 Why, he does not trust his own servants and charges his angels with frailties;
19 How much more those who inhabit houses of clay! such as have their foundations on the earth and are beaten down before a moth,
20 Between morning and evening they are shattered, are lost for all time without anyone’s noticing it.
21 A fiber pulls out within them and they die unaccountably.’
Job
5:1-27
5 “Call: is there one that will answer you? and to which of the Holy Ones will you turn?
2 For vexation kills an ignorant man and jealousy brings a simpleton to death.
3 I have seen an ignoramus take root,but suddenly the ground he stood on was lost.
4 His sons are far from succor, are overborne in the gate and there is no deliverer;
5 What they have harvested a hungry man eats, and thirsty men gulp their abundance.
6 For misfortune does not come out of the earth nor trouble sprout from the soil;
7 For man breeds trouble, and sparks fly high.
8 But I would apply to Deity and state my problem to God,
9 Who does things great and inscrutable, wonderful things in uncountable number,
10 Him who gives rain over earth and sends water over all outdoors,
11 While he sets lowly men on high and men that wore black mount to triumph;
12 Who frustrates shrewd men’s plans, and their hands do nothing that makes sense;
13 Who catches wise men in their own shrewdness, and crafty men’s policy goes rash.
14 In the daytime they meet with darkness and they grope as if in the night at noon,
15 And he saves from their swords an orphan and from a strong man’s hands a needy man,
16 And the poor man comes to have hope and foul play shuts its mouth.
17 Happy the man whom God corrects; do not reject Shaddai’s discipline;
18 For he hurts and he bandages, He mangles and his hands heal.
19 In six distresses he will deliver you and in seven no harm shall touch you;
20 In famine he will have paid your ransom from death and in war from the power of the sword;
21 When a tongue scourges, you shall be hidden, and you shall not be afraid of havoc when it comes.
22 At havoc and at starvation you shall laugh, and of the wild beasts you shall not be afraid, 23 Because you have your pact with the stones of the field and the wild beasts have made peace with you.
6:1-30
6 But Job answered
2 “If only my vexation were to be weighed and they were to take up my catastrophe altogether on the scales,
3 Because it would then outweigh the sand of the sea! that is why my words were so rash.
4 For I have Shaddai’s arrows in me, their poison drinking out my spirit; God’s overwhelmings are in the field against me.
5 Will a wild ass bray over greensward or a cow moo over its mess of barley?
6 Is flour paste to be eaten without salt, or is there flavor in marshmallow?
7 My appetite refuses to touch, loathes my food like the discharges of my disease.
8 If only what I ask would come, and God would give what I am hoping for,
9 And God would be pleased to fell me, would turn his hand loose and finish me off!
10 And it would yet be my comfort, and I should break away in the pang that he does not spare, because I have never hushed up the say of the Holy One.
11 What is my strength, that I should wait? and what is my end, that I should be patient?
12 Or is my strength the strength of stones? or is my flesh bronze?
13 Or do I have in me no help for myself and are sensible ideas knocked out of me?
14 One who fails to get friendship from his friend will leave off the fear of Shaddai.
15 My brothers have played false like an arroyo, like a bed of arroyo-streams that run off,
16 That are black with winter weather, on which snow goes out of sight;
17 At the scorching time they are wiped out; in the heat they disappear from their place;
18 The line of their course twists about, they go up into nothingness and are lost.
19 The wayfarers from Teman were looking,the caravans from Sheba were hoping for them;
20 They were disappointed because they had relied on them; they came to them and were discomfited.
21 You have now been the same to me; you see a horror and are afraid.
22 Was I saying ‘Give me’ or ‘Pay a tip for me out of your means
23 And get me off out of a foeman’s hands and ransom me out of the hands of ruffians’?
24 Instruct me and I will be silent; make it clear to me what missteps I have made.
25 How telling are frank utterances! but what does correction from you correct?
26 Do you think of correcting talk? but a despairing man’s say amounts to wind.
7:1-21
7 “Does not a man have a term of duty on earth,and is not his time like a hired hand’s?
2 Like a slave panting for a shadow and a hired hand looking forward to his pay,
3 So I have been assigned moons of futility and nights of trouble are counted off for me.
4 When I lie down I think ‘When can I get up?’ evening stretches on, and I have all I can hold of tossing till daybreak.
5 My flesh is clothed in maggots and clods; my skin sets and liquefies.
6 My days go faster than a shuttle and come to an end with no sort of hope.
7 Remember, God, that my life is a breath of wind; my eye will never get back to seeing good;
8 The eye of him who is seeing me will not behold me, while your eyes are on me I am gone.
9 A cloud clears up and goes off; just so one who goes down to the world below will never come up.
10 He will never come back to his house and his place will not greet him again.
11 I on my part will not check my mouth, will speak in the distress of my spirit, will protest in the ache of my heart.
12 Am I a sea, or a sea-monster, that you set a watch over me?
13 When I think ‘my bed will comfort me, my couch will help carry my grievance,’
14 You dismay me with dreams and overwhelm me with visions,
15 And my soul chooses strangling, rather death than my woes.
16 I will not take it; I shall not live forever; let me be, because my days are a puff of air.
17 What is man that you should make much of him and fix your attention on him
18 And inspect him every morning, test him every moment?
19 How long will you never glance away from me, not let up long enough for me to swallow my spittle?
20 I sinned; what am I doing to you, Keeper of man? Why do you set me as a thing in your way and have me as a load to carry,
21 And not pardon my crime and set my guilt aside?
For right off I shall be lying in the clay, and you will go in quest of me and I shall not be there.”
8:1-22
8 And Bildad the Shuhite answered
2 “Till when will you keep up this talk and shall the words of your mouth be a big wind?
3 Will Deity play tricks with justice or Shaddai with right?
4 If your sons sinned against him he let them bear the consequences of their crime;
5 If you will direct your quest toward Deity and beseech Shaddai,
6 If you are pure and right-minded he will rouse for you now and revive your righteous standing,
7 And your past will have been little and your future will be right ample.
8 For ask a past generation and observe their fathers’ researches,
9 Because we are yesterday’s growth; we do not know; for our days on earth are a shadow.
10 Will not they instruct you, tell you, and bring out words from their hearts?
11 Will papyrus stalks make a jungle in anything but a morass? will reeds thrive without water?
12 Still unripe, unplucked, before any grass they dry out.
13 Such are the paths of all who forget Deity, and the hope of an irreligious man comes to nothing,
14 One whose reliance is a gossamer and the object of his confidence is a spider’s tent.
15 He leans on his house and does not stand, takes hold of it and does not get on his feet.
16 He is lush before the sun and his runners run out over his garden,
17 His roots are matted about a stone-heap, he takes hold of a structure of rocks.
18 If He annihilates him from his place it will disavow him, ‘I never saw you.’
19 That is the triumphant climax of his career, and another sprouts up from the ground.
20 Deity does not repudiate a conscientious man nor lend a hand to evil-doers.
21 He will yet fill your mouth with laughter and your lips with hurrahs.
22 Those who hate you will be wrapped in shame, and wrong-doers’ tent will be nowhere.”
9:1-35
9 But Job answered
2 “Certainly, I know it is so, and how is a human being to be in the right with Deity?
3 If he chooses to argue a case with him he will not answer him one point out of a thousand.
4 Wise in heart and mighty in strength, who has defied him and remained safe and sound?
5 Him who displaces mountains before they know it, as he has overthrown them in his anger;
6 Him who shakes earth loose from its place and its pillars quiver;
7 Him who says a thing to the sun and it does not break out, and seals off stars;
8 Sole spreader of sky, treader on heights of sea,
 nxg^k3ecat (m\EC\E0\BBha\CC\C4\FD5l\E1\EDo)\E4\ADe`Cx &yioeo`g(e\F2\A8lgq\FB+\96yɵmt\81\A5|a B`0q\F1\F7o!Gfh\9C\00-.X\00\8A591wn\E3`e$o\ED4\E1\A1p9\A0me(e\E2%\A5I Hm\80~5\F0 r
oi\E4 G\93Rc\E1:\B5*<k'aBmmwe\EFqmdΐc2]\ABusữ$mk5I8\89
15 I who if I were in the right would not answer, would beg as a favor for what was my right.
16 If I called and he answered me I would not believe that he would give ear to my voice,
17 He who deals me hurts in a tempest and multiplies my sores for nothing,
18 Does not let me get back my breath but gives me all the bitter mouthfuls I can hold.
19 As for stark strength, there it is! but as for judgment, who will set me a date?
20 If I am in the right my own mouth will put me in the wrong; I am virtuous and he has made a crook of me.
21 I am virtuous I do not think of my person I want nothing of my life
22 It is all one; therefore I say, he makes a clean sweep of virtuous man and rogue.
23 If a scourge brings sudden death he makes fun of innocent men’s despair.
24 A country is given into a rogue’s hands; he covers its judges’ faces.
25 And my days are swifter than a runner, have gone off without seeing anything good,
26 Have passed like reed boats, like a vulture shooting toward food
27 If I say I will forget my grievance, will quit my dismalness and brighten up,
28 I quail at all my woes, I know I shall not be acquitted.
29 I am the one to be found guilty what should I take useless trouble for?
30 If I take a snow bath and clean my hands with alkali,
31 Then he will dip me in a mudhole and my garments will abominate me.
10:1-22
10 My soul loathes being alive; I will quit grieving to myself, I will speak in the ache of my heart.
2 I will say to God ‘Do not declare me guilty, let me know what you are prosecuting me for.
3 Does it do you good to deny justice, to repudiate what your hands have toiled on and beam upon the policy of wrong-doers?
4 Do you have a mortal’s eyes or see as mankind sees,
5 Are your days like a human being’s days or your years like a man’s days,
6 That you hunt up my guilt and make a search for my sin,
7 Notwithstanding your knowledge that I shall not prove to be doing wrong and there is nobody to deliver out of your hands?
8 Your hands molded me and made me; afterward you swing round and wipe me out.
9 Remember that you made me in clay and are putting me back in the loam.
10 Did you not pour me like milk and curdle me like cheese,
11 Clothe me with skin and flesh and frame me with bones and sinews,
12 Make life in me, befriend me, and your thoughtfulness guarded my spirit
13 And you had these things hidden in your heart; I know you have had this in mind.
14 If I sinned you would watch me and not acquit me of my guilt;
15 If I did wrong, woe to me; or right, I should not lift up my head, Eating my fill of indignities and drinking my fill of misery,
16 Or if I bridled up you would hunt me like a lion and come back to your mysterious dealings with me,
17 Confront me with new witnesses and multiply your grievances against me, mobilize fresh divisions against me.
18 And why did you bring me out of a womb? I should have perished and no eye have seen me,
19 Been as if I had not existed, been taken from mother’s body to grave.
20 Is not my lifetime small? leave off, glance away from me and let me brighten up a little
21 Before I go, never to return, to a land of darkness and gloom,
22 A land of sable dusk, gloom and disorder, that beams sable rays.’”
11:1-20
11 And Sophar the Naʽamathite answered
2 “Is quantity of talk to go unanswered, or a loose-tongued man to pass for having right on his side?
3 Are your fine words to silence men, and are you to scoff uncriticized
4 And say ‘My doctrine is flawless and I was irreproachable under your eyes’?
5 But I would that God would speak and open his lips to debate with you,
6 And tell you the secrets of wisdom, because he is double in sense! Know that God is overlooking part of your guilt!
7 Will you explore God or exhaustively investigate Shaddai?
8 Higher than the sky what will you do? deeper than the realm of death what will you know?
9 Its measure is longer than the earth and wider than the sky.
10 If he goes past and locks a door and convenes a court, who will turn him back?
11 For he knows paltry men and sees villainy without paying attention.
12 But an empty-headed man gets brains when a wild ass’s colt is born human.
13 If you condition your heart and spread out your hands to him,
14 If there is villainy in your hands put it far away, and let foul play not lodge in your tents,
15 Why, then you will lift your face out of discredit and be in hard straits and not be afraid,
16 Because you will forget trouble, will remember it like water that has run past,
17 Life will stand up to surpass noontime, dusk will be like daybreak,
18 And you will rest assured, because there is hope, will look about at everything and go to bed in security
19 And lie with no one to alarm you, and many will seek your favor.
20 But wrong-doers’ eyes will wear out with watching, they will not have any place left to run to, and their hope will be exhaustion of heart.”
12:1-25
12 But Job answered
2 “You are indeed a people with whom wisdom will die!
3 I have brains like you, am not inferior to you, and who does not have things like these on hand?
4 ‘A butt for his neighbor’s laughter’ am I, ‘one who called on God and he answered him, an honest conscientious man is a butt.’
5 ‘To the thinking of one who is at ease, disaster is to be pooh-poohed; for one whose foot is giving way it is a solid certainty.’
6 ‘Marauders’ tents prosper and there is security for those who disturb Deity, for the one who brings God in his hand.’
7 But ask beasts and they will inform you, the birds of the air and they will tell you,
8 Or crawlers of the earth and they will inform you, and the fishes of the sea will tell you the story:
9 Who does not know by all these that Jehovah’s hand made this,
10 In whose hand is the soul of everything living and the breath of all flesh of men?
11 Does not an ear test words and a palate do its tasting of food?
12 In graybeards is wisdom, and length of life is intelligence
13 With him is wisdom and efficiency, his are skill and intelligence.
14 Where he demolishes, there is no rebuilding; he locks a man up and there is no unlocking;
15 When he shuts off the water, it dries out; he lets it loose and it tears up the earth.
16 With him are might and sagacity; to him belong misled and misleader.
17 One who sets counselors to going stripped and judges to running wild,
18 Undoes kings’ control and ties a loincloth on their waists,
19 One who sets priests to going stripped and upsets immemorial status,
20 One who makes reliable men’s tongues slip and takes away old men’s sagacity,
21 One who pours contempt on nobles and slackens irresistible men’s girdles,
22 One who unveils abysmal things out of darkness and brings gloom to light,
23 One who makes nations immense and destroys them, spreads out folk upon folk and leaves them lying,
24 One who turns aside the minds of the heads of the populace and sets them wandering in pathless nothingness,
25 Groping in unlighted darkness; and he makes them wander about like a drunken man.
13:1-28
13 There, my eye has seen everything, my ear has heard and understood it;
2 I too know the same things you know, am not inferior to you.
3 But I am speaking to Shaddai and would like to argue with Deity.
4 But you are whitewashers, quack doctors all of you.
5 Would that you would hold your tongues so that it should become wisdom for you!
6 Hear out my argument and listen to the contentions of my lips!
7 Will you talk unfairly for Deity and stream out fraud for him?
8 Will you be partial to his side, or champion Deity’s cause?
9 Is it a good thing that he should investigate you, or would you hoax him as one hoaxes a man?
10 He will be calling you to account if you show private partiality.
11 Should not his majesty overwhelm you and the dread of him fall upon you?
12 Your memorable sayings are proverbs of ashes, your shield-bosses turn out to be crockery.
13 Be still, and I will do the talking, come what may.
14 I will pick up my flesh in my teeth, take my life in my hand.
15 Suppose he slays me: I will not wait, I will just argue my course to his face.
16 He will become salvation to me too, because an ungodly man will not be admitted before him.
17 Hear my word, do, and take my demonstration into your ears.
18 Here I have formulated my case: I know I am the one that will turn out to be in the right.
19 Who will join issue with me? for I would now hold my tongue and pass away.
20 Only do not do two things with me, then I will not screen myself from your face:
21 Take your hand away from me and let your terror not overwhelm me,
22 And call, and I will answer; or I will speak, and return me a reply.
23 How much of guilts and sins do I have? let me know my crime and sin.
24 Why do you veil your face from me and count me as an enemy of yours?
25 Would you terrorize a driven leaf or chase dry straw,
26 That you list bitter things against me and saddle me with the guilts of my boyhood
27 And set my feet in the stocks, and watch all my paths, and mark a line round the soles of my feet
28 And he is like a worn-out water-bag, like a moth-eaten blanket.
Job 14:1-22
14 “Man, the woman-born, has a scanty lifetime and an overload of difficulties.
2 Like a flower he came out and wilted, fled away like a shadow and does not stand.
3 Upon even this you open your eyes and summon him to appear against you for trial!
4 Who shall produce a clean thing out of unclean? not one.
5 If his time is decided, you have his number of months, you have drawn his bounds and he is not to go beyond,
6 Glance away from him and leave off till, like a hired man, he takes the satisfaction of his day.
7 For there is hope for a tree: if it is cut down, it starts again, and its shoot will not fail to come;
8 If its root grows old in the ground and its trunk dies in the soil,
9 At the scent of water it will sprout and make a twig like a young tree newly set.
10 But a man dies and lies lifeless; a human being breathes his last, and where is he?
11 Water goes away from a sea and a river dries off and out,
12 And a man lies down and will not get up; till the sky wears out they will not wake nor rouse from their sleep.
13 O that you would stow me away in the world below, screen me till your anger turned back, fix a date for me and remember me!
14 If a man dies will he come to life? I would wait all the time I had to serve till my relief came;
15 You would call and I would answer you; you would have a yearning for the work of your hands.
16 For then you would be counting my steps, not watching for my sin,
17 My crime would be packed up under seal, and you would whitewash my guilt.
18 “But a mountain tumbles down, wears out, and a rock shifts from its place;
19 Water pulverizes stones; a cloudburst washes away soil; and you have crushed man’s hope.
20 You force him permanently out, and he goes; you change his face and turn him off.
21 His sons rise to honor and he does not know it, or sink into insignificance and he does not find out about them;
22 Only his flesh feels pain upon himself and his soul is mournful over himself.”
15:1-35
15 And Eliphaz the Temanite answered
2 “Would a wise man answer with windy ideas and fill himself up with east wind,
3 Arguing with unserviceable talk and useless phrases?
4 You, besides, are breaking up fear of the Deity and lessening thoughtfulness before him,
5 Because your guilt is tutoring your mouth and you choose artful men’s language.
6 Your own mouth shall prove you in the wrong, not I, and your own lips shall testify against you.
7 Are you the first of men to be born? were you brought forth before the hills?
8 Did you listen into God’s private conference and sequester some wisdom for yourself?
9 What do you know that we do not, perceive that we are not aware of?
10 We have among us graybeard and patriarch, further on in years than your father.
11 Are Deity’s consolations too little for you, and talk that is easy on you?
12 Why does your heart carry you away, and what do your eyes fasten on,
13 That you send your breath back to Deity and pour phrases out of your mouth?
14 What is man that he should be pure and that one born of woman should be in the right?
15 Here, he does not put trust in his holy ones and sky is not pure to his eyes,
16 To say nothing of an abominable and degenerate being, a man who drinks rascality like water.
17 “I will show you; give me a hearing; I have recognized this and will tell you about it,
18 What wise men state and their fathers have not kept back.
19 They had the country given to them alone, and no stranger came through among them.
20 All a wrong-doer’s life he is in expectation, the number of years that are laid up for the violent man.
21 Sounds of dread are in his ears, in peace there is a ravager coming to him;
22 He does not count on coming back out of darkness, and he is marked for the sword;
23 He has an appointment to be a meal for a kite; he knows his disaster is a settled thing;
24 A day of darkness will overwhelm him, distress and hard straits will overpower him, like a king ready for the onslaught,
25 Because he stretched out his hand against Deity and blustered against Shaddai,
26 Running at him headlong with thick shield-fronts.
27 Because he covered his face with fat and put on flesh in his waist,
28 And planted himself in extirpated cities, houses that were never to be lived in, which had been made ready to become heaps of stones,
29 His means shall not be rich, shall not grow up to stalks, shall not bend ears earthward;
30 He shall not get out of darkness; flame shall dry up his shoot, and his buds shall blow off in the wind;
31 Let him not trust to rambling futility, for futility will be his purchase;
32 His fronds shall wither untimely and his new fronds not grow verdant;
33 He shall blast his berries like a grapevine and drop his blossoms like an olive-tree.
34 For a godless man’s company is stony ground, and fire has devoured the tents of bribery;
35 There is breeding of trouble and giving birth to villainy, and inside them fraud is shaping up.”
Job 16:1-22
16 But Job answered
2 “I have heard plenty like that; you are plaguy comforters all of you.
3 Is there any end to windy talk? or what is galling you, that you answer?
4 I too might speak as you do if your souls were in the place of mine; I might string phrases together about you and shake my head over you;
5 I might brace you up with my mouth, and the comfort of my lips might check
6 If I speak my pain is not checked, and if I refrain what passes away from me?
7 He has just tired me out now; you have laid all my company desolate,
8 And you have gripped me, it has become a witness, and my leanness stands up against me, testifies to my face.
9 His anger tore me and flung me down; he ground his teeth at me; my foe sharpens his eyes for me.
10 They have opened their mouths at me, insolently struck my cheeks, collected in full force against me.
11 The Deity gives me up to a foul-player and thrusts me into the hands of wrong-doers.
12 I was in quietness and he jerked me, took me by the back of my neck and burst me, And sets me up for his target,
13 his marksmen surround me, And he cuts through my kidneys unsparingly, lets my gall run out on the ground,
14 Wounds me with wound across wound, runs at me like a warrior.
15 I have stitched a sackcloth on my hide and run my horn into the clay,
16 My face is inflamed with weeping and there is gloom over my eyelashes,
17 For no violence that I have on my hands; and my prayer is pure.
18 Earth, do not cover my blood, and let there be no place for my outcry!
19 Even now my witness is there, in the heavens, and I have my voucher aloft,
20 My friend is my interpreter; to God my eye drips,
21 That he would arbitrate for a man with a God and between a human being and his fellow.
22 For a few years are to come and I shall go on the track I shall not come back on.
17:1-16
17 My spirit is blighted, my days are snuffed out, graves are mine.
2 Decidedly I have triflers about me and my eyes grow tired resting on their ungovernableness.
3 Give yourself bail for me; who would there be to strike into my hand?
4 For you have kept their hearts closeted from sense; therefore you will not set them on high.
5 He notifies friends for a share, and his sons’ eyes are worn out with looking and longing.
6 But you have set me up for a byword of peoples, and I am a phenomenon before them,
7 And my eyes are dim with vexation and my figure dissolves like a shadow.
8 Upright men will stand aghast at this, and an innocent man be stirred up against an ungodly;
9 But a right-doer will hold his course and a cleanhanded man grow increasingly resolute.
10 But you may all come again and I shall not find a wise man among you.
11 My days have gone past; I am annihilated; my heartstrings are snapped.
12 They make night into day, ‘light is near, coming away from darkness.’
13 If I hope, the realm of death is my house; I have made up my couch in the darkness;
14 I have called decay my father, the maggot my mother and sister,
15 And where is hope of mine? and who is to behold good fortune of mine?
16 Will they go down with me to the realm of death? or shall we go underground together?”
18:1-21
18 And Bildad the Shuhite answered
2 “How long will you be snaring phrases?
See the point, and afterward we may talk.
3 How comes it we seem like cattle to your eyes,
4 you that tear yourself in your anger? Is earth to be forsaken on your account, and a rock shifted from its place?
5 A wrong-doer’s light does go out, and the blaze of his fire gives no radiance.
6 Light turns dark in his tent, and his lamp goes out over him.
7 His vigorous steps will be cramped and his own purposes will upset him,
8 For he runs his feet into a net and walks along on wickerwork.
9 A trap will grip his heel and a noose clutch him.
10 The cord for him is hidden on the earth and the snare for him along the path.
11 On all sides wraiths overwhelm him and chevy him wherever he goes.
12 His vigor is famished and calamity stands ready for his weakening.
13 His skin is eaten away by disease; the firstborn of death eats his members.
14 He is torn out of his tent, what he trusted to, and is marched to the king of wraiths.
15 There shall be living in his tent something that is not his; brimstone shall be sprinkled over his lands.
16 His roots shall die out underneath and his twigs wither overhead.
17 The memory of him is lost from earth and there is no name of his over the wide world.
18 He is pushed out of light into darkness and sent flitting out of the world.
19 He has neither chick nor child among his people nor any survivor in the places he has visited.
20 Over the day that comes for him men of the west shall stand aghast and men of the east be taken with a shudder.
21 Altogether such are the dwellings of a malefactor, and like this is the place of one who knows not Deity.”
19:1-29
19 But Job answered
2 “How long will you make my soul miserable and beat me down with phrases?
3 This is ten times you have been humiliating me, you are not embarrassed to keep saying spiteful things about me.
4 But even take it that I really have made a misstep: it is with me my misstep is lodged.
5 If you are really taking high ground with me and proving my ignominy against me,
6 Know that it is God has done the unfair thing by me and set his toils round me.
7 Suppose I cry murder, I am not answered; I shout an appeal and there is no administration of justice.
8 He has walled off my road and I cannot pass; he has spread darkness over my paths.
9 He has stripped my honor off me and taken away the crown from my head.
10 He tears down every side of me, and I am gone, and he has cleared away my hope like a piece of timber.
11 He is angry with me and thinks of me as he does of his foes.
12 His raiders come on unitedly and have built their road against me and are camped round my tent.
13 He has set my brothers to standing aloof from me, and my acquaintances are altogether estranged from me.
14 My nearest and dearest have quit, my housemates have forgotten me,
15 And my serving-maids think me a stranger, I seem to them a foreigner.
16 I have called my slave and he does not answer I beg him for favors with my own mouth.
17 My breath is hateful to my wife and I smell foul to the sons of my body.
18 Even children think nothing of me; let me stand up, they talk at me.
19 All my bosom friends abhor me, and whom I loved have turned on me.
20 My bones stick to my skin, and I come off with my flesh in my teeth.
21 Be kind to me, be kind to me, you friends of mine, because God’s hand has touched me.
22 Why is it you chase me down as Deity does and can never get enough of my flesh?
23 O that what I have to say were written down, were registered in a document,
24 With iron pen and lead, carved in rock forevermore!
25 But as for me, I know my vindicator is alive, and one in future will stand up above ground,
26 And behind my skin, which has borne this, out of my flesh I shall behold God,
27 Whom I shall behold for myself; it will be my eyes that saw, and not a stranger my heart is spent in my bosom!
28 When you think ‘What of his shall we chase down and find ground for a case in him?’
29 Quail on your own account for fear of a sword, because those are offenses to bring down the sword, so that you may know there is an arbiter.”
20:1-29
20 And Sophar the Naʽamathite answered
2 “For that my thoughts give me response, and by reason of it I am hurried on.
3 I hear a tutoring that humiliates me and wind rather than sense answers me
4 Have you known this from of yore, since man was set on earth?
5 For wrong-doers’ caroling is shortsighted, and an ungodly man’s merrymaking is momentary.
6 If he lifts his crest to the sky and his head touches the cloud,
7 Like his dung he perishes utterly; those who saw him say ‘Where is he?’
8 Like a dream he takes wing and one cannot find him; he flits away like a vision of the night.
9 An eye has glimpsed him, but does so no more, and his place will not behold him again.
10 His sons must give satisfaction to poor men, his hands give back his goods.
11 His bones are full of his virility, but with him it lies down in the clay.
12 If evil is sweet in his mouth, he hides it under his tongue,
13 Saves it up, will not let go of it, keeps it snug in the roof of his mouth,
14 His dinner turns in his bowels, he has vipers’ gall within him,
15 He has swallowed wealth but must throw it up, Deity ousts it from his stomach.
16 He sucks vipers’ poison, a sand-adder’s tongue will kill him.
17 He must never look on outflows of oil, streams of honey and clabber.
18 Because of old age he will not swallow what he has spent his strength on, he will not be gay in proportion to the wealth he has traded for,
19 Because he victimized and abandoned poor men, stole a house, and does no building on it.
20 Because he had no quiet in his stomach, in his wishes he let nothing get away,
21 There was nothing left over from his eating, therefore his good time will not persist.
22 In his full plenty let him come into distress, all the force of trouble come over him.
23 Let him have his bellyful, let Him turn His anger loose on him and shower it on him into his entrails.
24 He takes flight from arms of iron; a bow of bronze drives through him;
25 He pulls and it comes out of his back, comes flashing away from his gall.
Terrors are upon him; 26 all darkness lurks for him. Let an unblown fire consume him, feed on survivors in his tent;
27 Let the heavens uncover his guilt and earth be an adversary to him;
28 Let the progeny of his house be swept out of the country, drifted wreckage on the day of His anger.
29 This is a wicked man’s lot from God, and the estate named for him by Deity.”
21:1-34
21 But Job answered
2 “Do hear what I have to say, and let this be your comforting.
3 Bear me, and I myself will speak; and after I speak you shall make your fun.
4 Is my grievance against man? and how should I not be impatient?
5 Face toward me and stand aghast and lay your hands over your mouths!
6 And if I bethink myself I am in consternation, and a shudder seizes my flesh.
7 How comes it that wrong-doers live, come to advanced age and are still notably robust?
8 Their posterity is firmly established before them; their offspring is numerous under their eyes.
9 Their houses are at peace from dread, and God’s cudgel is not on them.
10 His bull covers and does not miss, his cow calves and does not slink.
11 They let out their brats like sheep and goats, and their children caper about.
12 They sing with tambourine and lyre and make merry to the sound of the pipe.
13 They wear out their days in comfort, and all of a sudden they go down to the world below.
14 And they have said to the Deity ‘Get out of our way, we do not care to know your courses.
15 What is Shaddai that we should worship him, and what good should we do when we invoked him?’
16 Here it is not in their hands that their comfort lies, wrong-doers’ principles are far from him
17 How often do wrong-doers’ lamps go out and their calamity come upon them, cords grip them by his anger,
18 Do they become like straw before a wind and like chaff that a gale filches?
19 Let him not lay his misfortune away for his sons; let him pay it up to himself and let him know it.
20 Let his eyes see his calamity and let him drink ire of Shaddai.
21 For what concern has he for his family after him, when his number of months has been cut off?
22 Should one teach the Deity knowledge, when it is he judges those on high?
23 This one dies in perfect soundness, all quiet and at ease,
24 His crocks are full of milk and the marrow of his bones has its drink,
25 And that one dies in bitter soul and has never eaten a comfortable meal;
26 Together they lie down on the clay and maggots cover them over.
27 Here, I know your ideas and such designs as you contemplate against me,
28 That you say ‘Where is an aristocrat’s house? and where are wrong-doers’ dwellings?’
29 Have you not asked travelers, and do you not recognize their tokens?
30 That the bad man is kept back on the day of calamity, gets the better of the day of wrath?
31 And who tells him of his course to his face? and if he has done a thing who pays him back?
32 And he is brought to burial and his mound is attended to.
33 Arroyo clods are sweet to him, and all men pour along after him and innumerable before him.
34 And how are you to comfort me with thin air, when your answers sift down to unreliability?”
22 And Eliphaz the Temanite answered
2 “Is a man to be serviceable to God? why, it is to himself that a capable man is serviceable.
3 Does Shaddai have any concern that you should do right, or any profit when you follow a conscientious course?
4 Would it be for your piety that he would reprove you and arraign you for judgment?
5 Is it not that your wickedness is greatand your guilt infinite,
6 Because you demand pawns of your brothers without reason and strip off naked men’s garments,
7 Do not give a drink of water to a fainting man and refuse bread to a hungry man,
8 But a strong-handed man has the country for his own, and an influential man is to live in it;
9 You turn widows away empty-handed and batter orphans’ arms?
10 That is why there are traps around you and dread throws you into sudden consternation,
11 Light has turned dark for you, you cannot see, and spray of water covers you.
12 Of course, God stands high in the heavens and sees the heads of the stars, lofty though they be,
13 And you think ‘What does God know? will he judge through thick air?
14 Clouds are a screen to him and he will not see; and he will be walking the vault of the heavens.’
15 Will you keep to the foul-players’ path, the one villains have trodden,
16 Who were seized untimely, a river pouring upon their foundation,
17 Those who said to Deity ‘Get out of our way’ and ‘What should Shaddai do to us?’
18 When it was he that had filled their houses with good things; wrong-doers’ principles are far from him.
19 Honest men see and are glad, and an innocent man derides them:
20 ‘They are positively annihilated, every mother’s son, and fire has consumed the last remnant of them.’
21 Get used to him and on good terms with him; by that what comes to you will be good.
22 Take an instruction from his mouth and lodge his say in your heart.
23 If you go back to Shaddai, humbling yourself, put foul play far off from your tent,
24 Lay ore in dust and Ophir gold among arroyo rocks,
25 Then Shaddai will be your nuggets and peak-silver to you.
26 For then you will be happy over Shaddai and raise your face to God,
27 You will invoke him and he will hear you and you will be paying your vows,
28 And you will decide on a thing and have it hold good for you, and light will be beaming over your paths.
29 For he brings low the lofty and proud man, and the man of downcast eyes he saves.
30 He will bring to safety one who is not innocent, and he shall be brought to safety by the cleanness of your hands.”
23:1-17
23 But Job answered
2 “Today too my complaint is rebellion! my hand lies heavy on my moans.
3 If only I knew how to find him, come to his seat!
4 I would formulate my case before him and fill my mouth with arguments;
5 I should find out what points he would make in answer to me, should see what he would say to me.
6 Would he maintain his contention against me by superior strength? not he, he would just pay attention to me.
7 There I should have one who was candid arguing with me, and I should definitively get clear from my judge.
8 Here I go east and he is not there, and west and I do not perceive him,
9 I look for him in the north and do not behold him, swing round to the south and do not see him,
10 While he knows which way I stand; were he to test me, I should come out like gold.
11 My foot holds on to his tracks, I watch his course and do not swerve,
12 From the command of his lips I do not shift, in my bosom I have laid up the say of his mouth.
13 But when he has his mind made up who will turn him back? he hankers and he acts.
14 For he will go through with what he has marked out for me, and has in store plenty of things like that.
15 That is why I am affrighted at him; I realize the situation and stand in dread of him,
16 And Deity has unnerved me and left me terror-struck.
17 For I do not break down at darkness and at being covered with blackness.
24 “How comes it times are not reserved by Shaddai and those who know him do not behold his days?
2 These displace boundary-marks, steal a flock and pasture it,
3 Drive off orphans’ donkeys, take a widow’s cow and hold it as a pawn,
4 Force needy men off the road; earth’s downtrodden go into hiding together.
5 They go out in the wilderness like wild asses in their activities in quest of anything that can be eaten; he has desert wastes as food for the boys.
6 On the range they make a harvest of its cattle-feed, they go through a wicked man’s vineyard for belated grapes.
7 They pass the night naked for want of clothing and coverless in the cold.
8 They are wet with mountain rainstorms and hug rocks for lack of shelter.
9 They steal orphan from breast and take in pawn a poverty-stricken man’s baby.
10 They go about naked for want of clothing, and while they go hungry they carry shocks of grain,
11 Between their walls they press oil, they tread winepresses and go thirsty.
12 Out of cities dying men groan and souls of men mortally wounded shriek. And God does not find any fault.
13 Those are rebels against light, do not recognize its routes nor settle in its paths.
14 When it is not light a murderer stands up, kills a downtrodden and needy man; and in the night a thief goes about.
15 And an adulterer’s eye watches for dusk, thinking ‘No eye will espy me,’ and he muffles up his face.
16 One breaks into houses in the dark.
By day they shut themselves in; they make no acquaintance with light;
17 For alike are morning to them and gloom, because they are familiar with the wraiths of gloom.
18 He is light on the surface of water; their share in the land shall be cursed; a treader shall not turn to their vineyard.
19 Drought, heat too, steal snow-water; the realm of death, who have sinned.
20 The womb that fashioned him will forget him, his loftiness will not go on to be remembered, and foul play breaks like a piece of wood.
21 One who does injuries to a barren woman that bears no children, and no good to a widow,
22 And drags down needy men by his power, stands up and does not put faith in living;
23 He grants him to have confidence and reliance, and his eyes are on their courses.
24 They have been lofty a little while, and there is nothing of them and they are laid low, collapse like alkali-sorrel, and are cut down like heads of grain.
25 If not, then, who will show me up as a liar and reduce my claims to nothing?”
25:1-6
25 And Bildad the Shuhite answered
2 “Dominion and terror are about him; he makes peace in his realms aloft.
3 Is there any counting his regiments? and over whom does his light not stand up?
4 How is a human being to be in the right with Deity? and how is one born of woman to be pure?
5 Here the very moon is not bright and stars are not pure to his eyes,
6 To say nothing of a human being, a maggot; of a son of mankind, a worm!”
26:1-14
26 But Job answered
2 “What a help you have been to one without strength, what a salvation to an arm without energy,
3 What a counselor to one without wisdom, and in what abundance you have imparted common sense!
4 Whom have you told what to say? and whose breath came out from you?
5 The shades writhe underneath the water and its denizens.
6 The realm of death lies naked before him and the land of the gone forever has no cover.
7 He stretches the north over vacancy, hangs earth on nothing,
8 Bundles up water in his thunderclouds and the cloud does not tear under it,
9 Encloses the face of the full moon, spreading his cloud over it.
10 He has drawn a boundary circle on the face of the water at the extremity of light, where it meets darkness.
11 The pillars of the sky rock and are confounded at his rebuke.
12 By his power he stirred the sea and by his understanding he mangled Rahab.
13 By his wind the sky is swept bare,and his hand pierced the elusive snake.
14 There, these are the edges of his course,
and what a whispered thing it is that we hear of him! but the thunder of his energies who may perceive?”
27:1-23
27 And Job further struck up his lay and said
2 “By the Deity, who has brushed aside my rights, and Shaddai, who has embittered my life,
3 When my breath was still all in me and God’s wind in my nostrils,
4 My lips shall not speak amiss nor my tongue voice false pretenses.
5 Away with the thought of my putting you in the right; till I breathe my last I will not throw off my conscientiousness.
6 I hold fast to my righteous cause and will not loosen my hold; my heart feels no remorse for any of my days.
7 May my enemy be in the state of a wrong-doer and my adversary in that of a knave!
8 For what is an ungodly man’s hope when God is cutting off and pulling out his soul?
9 Will Deity hear his cry when distress comes upon him,
10 Or will he be happy over Shaddai, call on God on every occasion?
11 I will instruct you as to the Deity’s hand; what Shaddai has in mind I will not conceal from you.
12 Here you have all of you seen the sights, what do you go into flights of fancy for?
13 This is a wicked man’s lot in the Deity’s plan, and the estate violent men are to get from Shaddai.
14 If his sons are numerous, the sword is for them, and his offspring will not have their fill of bread.
15 His survivors will be buried in death and his widows will not weep.
16 If he piles up silver like earth and lays up clothing as if it were clay,
17 He will lay it in and an honest man will wear it and innocent men share the silver among them.
18 He has built his house like a spider’s, like a booth a watchman makes.
19 He goes to bed rich, but is so no more; he opens his eyes and it is not there.
20 Dissolution descends upon him like water; in the night a gale snatches him,
21 An east wind picks him up and he goes, and it sweeps him out of his place.
22 He pelts him unsparingly; he is in constant flight from his hand.
23 He strikes his hands together over him and whistles at him from his place.
28:1-28
28 “For there is a mine for silver and a place for gold that they wash out.
2 Iron is taken out of earth,and one melts stone to copper.
3 Man has set an end to darkness, and to every extremity he ransacks stone of blackness and gloom.
4 An intruding people breaks into ravines that were forgotten by feet; they suffer privations, they rove from men
5 To a country from which bread has gone out and whose underpart turns to be like fire,
6 A place whose stones are malachite and which has clods of gold,
7 A path no bird of prey knows nor has a kite’s eye glimpsed it,
8 Which boldest beasts have not trodden nor lion passed along it.
9 He puts his hand to the pyrite rock, turns mountains up by their roots;
10 He rips out channels among the rocks, and his eye sees everything valuable.
11 He explores the sources of rivers and brings to light an undiscovered thing.
12 But where is wisdom to be had from, and what is the place for insight?
13 No man knows the road to it, and it is not to be found in the land of the living.
14 The deep says ‘it is not in me’ and the sea ‘I do not have it here.’
15 Solid gold is not to be given for it nor silver to be weighed out as its price;
16 It is not to be balanced against nuggets from Ophir, against the most precious beryl, or lapis lazuli;
17 Gold and glass will not match it, a thing of red gold be an exchange for it;
18 Pearls and alabaster are not to be mentioned, and wisdom is more of a prize than coral;
19 The Nubian chrysolite will not match it, nor against pure nugget-gold is it to be balanced;
20 And where does wisdom come from? and what is the place for insight?
21 It lies out of sight of any living thing and screened from the birds of the air.
22 Death and the land of the gone forever say ‘We have heard a hearsay of it.’
23 God understands the road to it, he knows the place for it,
24 Because he looks to the ends of the earth, sees under all the sky,
25 Determining a weight for the wind and proportioning the water by measure.
26 When he made a law of nature for the rain and a course for the lightning of thunder,
27 Then he saw it and described it, made it sure and thoroughly searched it out,
28 And he said to man ‘Here, fearing the Lord is wisdom and shunning what is bad is insight.’”
29:1-25
29 And Job further struck up his lay and said
2 “Would that I were as in old-time months, as in the days when God watched over me,
3 When he let his lamp beam over my head and by his light I walked through darkness!
4 As I was in my days of ripeness, when God had a fence round my home,
5 When Shaddai was still with me, my boys were around me,
6 When my callers washed their dust off in clabber and rocks on my grounds poured rills of oil.
7 When I went out of gate to town, prepared to take my seat in the square,
8 Young men saw me and hid and graybeards rose and stood;
9 Captains checked what they had to say and laid hand on their mouths;
10 Magistrates’ voices hid and their tongues stuck to the roof of their mouths.
11 For ears heard and deemed me happy, eyes saw and bore witness to me,
12 That I brought a downtrodden suppliant out of trouble, and an orphan, and one whom none would help;
13 The blessing of one who was perishing came upon me and I set a widow’s heart caroling.
14 I clothed myself in right, and like a robe and tiara justice clothed me.
15 I was eyes for the blind man, and feet for the lame man was I.
16 I was a father to the needy, and investigated the claims of the man I did not know
17 And smashed a knave’s fangs and knocked prey out of his teeth.
18 And I thought I should breathe my last with my nestlings and have my days as numerous as the sand,
19 With my roots spreading out to water and dew on my twigs through the night,
20 My honors fresh about me and my bow coming new in my hand.
21 They listened for me and waited, kept still to get my advice;
22 After my word they did not speak again, and my discourse came sprinkling down on them.
23 They waited for me as if for rain and held their mouths wide open for a spring shower.
24 I gave them a laugh, they did not believe; and my face shone, they did not let theirs fall.
25 I chose their course and sat as head,and lived like a king in a raiding-party, as if he were comforting mourners.
30 But now my juniors are laughing at me, whose fathers I had rejected for placing with my sheep-dogs.
2 Of what use was even the strength of their hands to me, men in whom solid vigor was lost, gaunt with destitution and starvation?
3 Those who gnaw arid downs, the emesh of blast and blight,
4 Who pluck alkali-sorrel, wormwood leaves, and have broom-roots for their bread;
5 They are driven out of a community, they yell at them as they would at a thief.
6 They have to live in the sides of arroyos, in holes in the ground and between stones.
7 They bray between wormwood bushes, snuggle together under weeds.
8 Sons of rascals, sons of nobody that can be named, they are whipped out of the country.
9 And now I am the butt of their jingles and have become a byword of theirs.
10 They abhor me, stand far away from me, do not keep their spit out of my face.
11 For he has undone my bowstring and made me helpless, and they loosen their reins before me.
12 On the right a horde stand up, unsettle my footing, and build their tracks of calamity against me.
13 They tear up my path, do great work for catastrophe, have nobody to help them.
14 They come like coming through a broad breach, roll along under the crash of ruin.
15 Dissolution turns upon me, my dignity is chased off as if by the wind, and my hope of succor passes like a cloud.
16 And now I have my life draining out, days of suffering are gripping me,
17 In the night my bones are being dug away and my sinews get no repose.
18 My garment takes strong hold, lies snug on me like the neck of my shirt.
19 He has laid me for clay, and I am made like earth and ashes.
20 I clamor to you and you do not answer me; I stand there and you observe me,
21 You turn brutal toward me, you wreak your grudge on me with the vast strength of your hand.
22 You pick me up into the air, ride me on the wind, let storm toss me.
23 For I know you will bring me back to death, to the rendezvous of everything alive.
24 Only he does not lay hands on a heap of ruin; or by his disaster will there be lucre for them?
25 I did weep for the man who was having a hard time, my soul grieved for the needy man;
26 I hoped for good, and evil came; I awaited light, and murky darkness came.
27 My vitals are boiling, never still; days of suffering confront me.
28 I go in mourning without sunshine, stand up and clamor publicly.
29 I am brother to jackals and fellow to ostriches.
30 My skin blackens and comes off, and my bones are hot with fever.
31 And my lyre has turned to mourning and my pipe to the voices of weepers.
31:1-40
31 “I put my eyes under a contract, and how was I to take notice of a maiden?
2 And what is God’s allotment from above and Shaddai’s assignment from on high?
3 Is it not calamity for a knave and mishap for villains?
4 Does not he see my courses and count all my steps?
5 If I walked with false pretense and my foot hurried toward fraud,
6 Let God weigh me in a fair balance and know about my conscientiousness.
7 If my tread has swerved from the course and my eye has followed my heart and anything has stuck to my hands,
8 Let me sow and another eat,and what grows for me be uprooted.
9 If my heart has been inveigled after a woman and I have lain in wait at my friend’s doorway,
10 Let my wife grind for another and others crouch over her.
11 For that would be lewdness, it would be guilt to come before a court.
12 For that is a fire that would eat down to the land of the gone forever and take out the roots of all my produce.
13 If I refused the rights of my slaves when they had a dispute with me,
14 What should I do when Deity stands up, and when he is punishing what answer should I make to him?
15 Did not he who made me in a mother’s body make them, and was it not one who worked us into shape in the womb?
16 If I withheld what poor men wanted and let a widow’s eyes wear out with looking and longing,
17 And ate my snack alone and an orphan did not eat part
18 (For from my boyhood I raised him as a father would, and ever since my birth I helped her along),
19 If I saw one perishing for lack of clothing and that a needy man had nothing to cover him,
20 If his back did not bless me and he get warmth out of the fleeces of my sheep,
21 If I shook my fist at a quiet man because I saw I had friends in court,
22 May my arm drop off from its shoulder, may it be broken through its long bone.
23 For Deity’s calamity is a thing I dread, and I cannot cope with his majesty.
24 If I have made gold my reliance and spoken of kethem as my confidence,
25 If I was gladdened because my wealth was great and I had a great deal at my disposal,
26 If I saw the light as it beamed and the moon walking sublimely
27 And I was secretly so simpleminded that my mouth kissed my hand,
28 That too would be guilt to come before a court, for I should have been lying to Deity above.
29 If I was glad of a disaster to one who hated me and was elated because evil had found him
30 Why, I did not let my throat sin asking his life with a curse;
31 If the men of my tent did not say ‘Who will bring somebody that has not had all he wanted of his meat?’
32 No visitor from abroad spent the night in the street; I opened my doors to the wayfarer.
33 If in human fashion I covered up my crime, burying my guilt under my cloak,
34 Because I stood in awe of a great crowd and the contempt of clans dismayed me,And I kept quiet, not going out of the doorway
35 I wish I had someone to hear me!Here is my signature, let Shaddai answer me!And a bill that my opponent had written,
36 wouldn’t I carry it on my shoulder,lace it on as a crown for me!
37 I would report to him the number of my steps, would receive him as a lord high steward should.
38 If my soil cries out against me and its furrows are weeping together,
39 If I have eaten its strength without paying money and have let the life go out of its owners,
40 Instead of wheat let briers come out, and instead of barley nightshade.”
End of the words of Job.
32:1-22
32 And these three men left off answering Job, because he felt that he was in the right.
2 And Elihu the son of Barakel the Buzite, of the clan of Ram, was angry: angry at Job for making himself out in the right against God,
3 and angry at his three friends for not finding an answer, and putting God in the wrong.
4 And Elihu had waited for Job in the talk because they were older than he,
5 but Elihu saw that the three men had no answer in their mouths, and was angry.
6 And Elihu the son of Barakel the Buzite answered “I am a youngster and you are gray-bearded men; that was why I was bashful and afraid to state my view among you.
7 I thought ‘Let days speak and number of years disclose wisdom.’
8 But it is a spirit in man, after all,and Shaddai’s breath makes them understand things.
9 It is not men of many days that are wise nor old men that understand what is right.
10 So I say, Hear me;I too will state my view.
11 Here I did wait for your words,listened for your discernments,Till you should hunt out something to say,
12 and applied my attention to you,And found Job had nobody to confute him,to answer his say, among you.
13 For fear you should say ‘We have discovered wisdom,’ Deity shall put him to rout, not a man.
14 And he has not marshaled points against me, nor will I answer him with what you said.
15 “They were dismayed, no longer made any answer, their phrases had moved out,
16 And was I to wait when they were not speaking, when they were at a standstill, no longer made any answer?
17 I will make the answer that is my portion, I too will state my view,
18 For I am full of things to be said,the spirit in my waist is putting me under a strain,
19 I feel my waist like wine that is not being opened; as with skins of new wine, an explosion is coming.
20 I will speak and get relief, will open my lips and answer.
21 May I not show partiality to any man; and to no human being will I pay compliments,
22 For I do not know how to pay compliments; my Maker might easily snatch me away.
33:1-33
33 But hear what I have to say, Job, and give ear to all my words.
2 Here I am opening my mouth, my tongue is speaking under its roof,
3 My say is the sincere expression of my heart and my lips utter the best of their knowledge.
4 Deity’s spirit made me and Shaddai’s breath put life into me.
5 Answer me if you can, join issue and stand up to me.
6 You will find me to be in the same relation to Deity as you; I was kneaded out of clay as you were.
7 Here will terror of me not overwhelm you nor my duress weigh you down.
8 “Only you said in my hearing, I heard a sound of such words,
9 ‘I am pure, free from crime, I am clear and have no guilt about me.
10 Here he is inventing antagonisms against me and counting me as an enemy of his,
11 Setting my feet in the stocks and watching all my paths.’
12 Here you are not right in this, I answer you, because God is more than man.
13 How come you setting up a case against him because he does not answer all your words?
14 For Deity speaks once for all and does not repeat it a second time.
15 In a dream, a vision of the night, when trances fall on men, in slumbers on the bed,
16 Then he makes disclosure to men and dismays them with sights that they see,
17 To turn away man from his doings and prune away pride from a man,
18 Hold back his life from the grave and his being from rushing upon destruction.
19 And he is admonished by pain on the bed and the discord in his bones is perpetual,
20 And his inclination loathes bread and his appetite the food it naturally craves.
21 His flesh gets too wasted to look at and his bones so bare nobody will look at them,
22 And his life is near to the grave and his being to the place of the dead.
23 If he has over him an angel, an interpreter, one out of a thousand, to tell man his right course,
24 And he is gracious to him and says ‘Let him off from going down to the Pit; I have been given satisfaction,’
25 His flesh will grow plumper than in childhood; he will come back to his youth.
26 He will invoke God and God will accept him, and he will see his face with shouts of joy; and he will give the man back his standing for righteousness.
27 He will sing before men and say ‘I sinned, I turned fair play to foul, and he did not give ma measure for measure,
28 He has redeemed my life from passing into the Pit, and my being has the sight of the light.’
29 Here Deity does all these things twice over, three times, with a man,
30 To turn his life back from the Pit to be lighted with the light of life;
31 Listen, Job, hear me, be silent for me to speak.
32 If there is anything to be said, answer me; speak, because I should like you to be in the right.
33 If there is not, hear me yourself; be silent and let me acquaint you with wisdom.”
34:1-37
34 And Elihu answered
2 “Wise men, hear my words; give ear to me, men of knowledge;
3 For ears test words and a palate tastes food.
4 Let us pick out rights and come to an understanding of what is good,
5 Because Job says ‘I am virtuous but Deity has taken away my rights;
6 Against my rights I am to be lying and I have a festering arrow in me without a crime.’
7 Who is such a man as Job, who drinks scurrility like water
8 And takes the route to fellowship with villains and to company with criminals?
9 Because he says ‘It is of no advantage to a man to be on good terms with God.’
10 So, men of sense, hear me: away with the thought of wrong-doing on Deity’s part, foul play on Shaddai’s,
11 For he will pay man back appropriately to what he does, and give each one the experiences proper to the path he takes.
12 In real truth Deity does not do wrong nor Shaddai play tricks with justice.
13 Who put him in charge of earth? and who established the whole universe?
14 If he should draw his spirit back to himself and take up to himself his breath,
15 All creatures of flesh would expire together and man would go back to clay.
16 And if you are in your senses, listen to me; give ear to the point I make.
17 Is it even to be that one who hates justice holds sway or a great right-doer does wrong?
18 He who says ‘reprobate’ to a king and ‘iniquitous’ to noblemen,
19 Who does not defer to generals nor recognize a prominent man before a poor man, because they are all the work of his hands?
20 They die in a moment, at midnight; he touches prominent men and they pass by, and removes a formidable fighter without turning a hand.
21 For his eyes are on a man’s courses and he sees all his steps;
22 There is no darkness, no gloom, that villains may be veiled in.
23 For a man does not have a date set him to go to Deity for a trial;
24 He breaks great men without an investigation and sets up others in their place.
25 So he is aware of their works, and overthrows in the night and they are beaten down.
26 For wrong-doers he cuffs them in a place with spectators,
27 Seeing that they had turned off from following him and not been regardful of any of his courses,
28 Bringing in before him a poor man’s outcry and letting him hear the outcry of downtrodden men.
29 But if he is quiet who is to condemn? or if he veils his face who is to behold him? be it over a nation or over a man alike,
30 That an ungodly man may not be king, a people’s trap.
31 For does he say to Deity ‘I bear; I will not do harmful things;
32 What I do not see, teach me yourself; if I have done amiss I will not keep on’?
33 Was he to make requital on the basis of your ideas, that you are vetoing?
For you are to choose, not I; what you know, speak out!
34 Men of brains will say to me, and a wise man who hears me,
35 Job speaks not by knowledge and his words do not run by common sense.
36 Let Job be kept under test permanently for answers that put him among villains!
37 For he adds rebelliousness to his sin, slaps his hands between us and talks volubly to the Deity.”
35:1-16
35 And Elihu answered
2 “Do you think this right, say ‘my good case before Deity,’
3 That you ask how it benefits you, ‘What good do I get more than by my sinning?’
4 I give you the answer, and your comrades with you,
5 Look at the sky and see, and behold the ether so high above you;
6 If you have sinned what are you doing to him, and if your crimes are many what effect has it on him?
7 If you have done right what are you giving to him, or what is he getting at your hands?
8 Your wrong-doing pertains to a man like yourself and your right-doing to a human being.
9 They cry out over the great number of denials of justice, they clamor over powerful men’s high hand,
10 And one has not said ‘Where is God my Maker, who gives songs in the night,
11 Who teaches us more than the beasts of earth and makes us wiser than the birds of the air?’
12 It is there that they cry unanswered because of the pride of bad men,
13 All in vain Deity does not hear and Shaddai does not regard it.
14 Even when you say you do not behold him, he has the case before him and you are to wait for him.
15 And now because he does not set his anger to work he does not thoroughly know the offense!
16 But Job is opening his mouth to let out air, uttering big phrases without knowing what he is talking about.”
36:1-33
36 And Elihu said further
2 “Wait a bit and I will show you, for there is more to say for God.
3 I will take a broad view and credit my Maker with doing right.
4 What I have to say is no falsification; you have with you one who is sincere in his views.
5 Lo, Deity is supreme and will not be disdainful, supreme in power of mind.
6 He will not let a wrong-doer live and will give downtrodden men their rights.
7 He will not minimize his attention to a right-doer, but with kings will enthrone them permanently, and they shall be exalted.
8 And if they are bound in fetters, caught in cords of misery,
9 He tells them of their doings and their offenses, that they were overweening,
10 And makes disciplinary disclosures to them and says they are to turn back from vileness.
11 If they listen and submit they shall finish their days in good living and their years in comfort;
12 But if they do not listen they will rush upon destruction and come to their end by lack of knowledge.
13 But men of godless heart take to anger, do not cry out petitions when he binds them;
14 Their vital spark shall die off in youth and their lives as do sodomite boys.
15 He rescues an unfortunate man in his misfortune and makes disclosures to them in privations.
16 And he has been enticing you out of the mouth of distress too,unconstrained roominess under it, and the setting down of your table full of rich food.
17 And you are full of the sentence on a wrong-doer; judgment and sentence take hold,
18 For let not choler entice you into mockery nor abundance of composition-money deflect you.
19 Will your clamor take effect without distress, and all exertions of strength?
20 Do not pant for the night, to have peoples go up where they stand.
21 Beware, do not turn to depravity, for you have been preferring this to suffering.
22 Lo, Deity shows himself supernal in his strength; who is such a preceptor as he?
23 Who has appointed his course for him, and who has said ‘You have done amiss’?
24 Remember to extol his work, of which men have sung.
25 All mankind view it, man looks at it from afar.
26 Lo, Deity is great beyond our knowledge; the number of his years is incalculable.
27 For he takes away drops from the sea to filter as rain for his mist,
28 Which the heavens let trickle down and let drop upon many a man.
29 Or does one understand the spreading of clouds either? the resoundings of his bower?
30 Lo, he spreads his mist about him and covers mountaintops.
31 For by them he provisions peoples, gives food on a great scale.
32 He covers a stone with light and orders it to strike a mark,
33 Assailing mischief and wrong and wreaking jealous anger on foul play.
37:1-24
37 My heart is alarmed too at this and jumps out of its place.
2 Hear, hear the commotions of his voice and what comes as a mutter from his mouth!
3 He sends it abroad under all the sky and his light over the edges of the earth.
4 Behind it a voice roars; he thunders with his sublime voice and does not hold them back when his voice is heard;
5 Deity thunders with his voice wondrously.
He does things great beyond our knowledge, 6 For he says to the snow ‘Fall to earth’ and showers down his mighty rains.
7 He seals up every human being’s hands that all men may know his work;
8 And beasts go into coverts and lodge in their dens.
9 Out of the Chamber comes a gale and out of Mezarim cold weather.
10 By Deity’s breath ice is put in and the breadth of water is in curbs.
11 Also he loads a cloud with refreshment, cloudy sky scatters his fall rain,
12 And it goes circling about by his guidance that they may do all that he orders them to over the world on the ground,
13 If for a cudgel, if for his earth, if for kindness he sends it to its goal.
14 Give ear to this, Job; stand still and realize Deity’s wonders.
15 Do you know how God lays their charge on them and the light of his clouds beams out?
16 Do you know about the hovering of clouds, the wonders of him who is faultless in skill?
17 Will you whose clothes grow hot when earth has quietness from the south
18 Be with him to consolidate heavens strong as a metal mirror?
19 Let us know what to say to him; we cannot get it in order for darkness.
20 Is he to be told the story of my speaking? or does any man think of being swept away?
21 And now they do not see light, it is a bright spot in the heavens; but a wind goes over and clears them.
22 From the north comes resplendence; over God there is a refulgence that is terrible.
23 Shaddai our minds do not reach to him, ample in strength and justice and great in right-dealing; he will not victimize.
24 So men fear him; he does not take notice of any wise-headed men.”
38:1-41
38 But Jehovah answered Job out of the tempest
2 “Who is this that is befogging a discussion by phrases without knowledge?
3 Gird your loins like a man so that I may ask you questions and you inform me.
4 Where were you when I laid the foundation of earth? tell, if you have competent knowledge.
5 Who determined its dimensions? for you know! or who stretched a measuring-line over it?
6 On what were its under-foundations planted? or who laid its cornerstone
7 While the morning stars shouted together and all the angels hurrahed?
8 Who enclosed the sea with doors when it came bursting out of the womb,
9 When I made clouds its clothing and thick air its wrapping
10 And broke a boundary for it and set a bar and doors,
11 And said ‘You are to come to here but not beyond, and here the pride of your waves shall break’?
12 Did you ever in your life command a morning, let a dawn know its place
13 To take hold of earth’s edges that wrong-doers may be shaken out of it?
14 It takes shape like clay printed with a stamp, and colors like a dress,
15 And wrong-doers have their light withheld, and a high-raised arm is broken.
16 Have you come to the sources of the sea and gone inspecting through the deep?
17 Have the gates of death been laid open for you, or the gatemen of gloom been afraid at sight of you?
18 Have you applied your attention to the breadths of earth? tell, if you know it all.
19 In which direction does light have its home, and which is the place for darkness?
20 Because you get it at its domain and are expert in the paths to its house.
21 You know, because you were born then and the number of your days is great!
22 Have you been into the reserves of snow, and seen the reserves of hail
23 Which I am holding back for a day of crisis,a day of battle and war?
24 In which direction is wind divided, east wind scattered over earth?
25 Who laid out a system of channels for floods and a course for the lightning of thunder,
26 To send rain on a country without a man, a wilderness with no human being in it,
27 To satisfy the hunger of blasted and blighted places and to make a thirsty place grow vegetation?
28 Does the rain have a father? or who brought dewdrops to birth?
29 Out of whose body did the ice come? and who gave birth to hoarfrost?
30 Water masks itself like a stone and the surface of the deep coheres.
31 Shall you be tying the laces of the Pleiades or unhitching the traces of Orion,
32 Making Mazzaroth come out at its time and guiding Aldebaran with its sons under it?
33 Do you know the laws of the sky or are you ordaining its supervision of the earth?
34 Will you send your voice aloft to the cloud and have a spray of water cover you?
35 Will you send lightnings abroad, and have them go and say to you ‘Here we are’?
36 Who implanted wisdom in the ibis? or who gave discernment to the cock?
37 Who counts in wisdom the threads of mare’s-tail clouds,and the water-bags of the sky who tips down
38 When loam runs into metal and clods cling together?
39 Will you hunt prey for a lioness and fill the need of two-year-old lions
40 When they are down in the lairs,sitting in ambush in a covert?
41 Who gets its provision ready for the raven when its young are clamoring to Deity, wandering about in want of food?
39:1-30
39 Do you know crag ibexes’ birth, watch does’ calving?
2 Do you count the months they fill out, and know their birth-date?
3 They crouch down, detach their young, let go what they have been hampered with;
4 Their children are robust, grow big in the wilds, go out and never come back.
5 Who set free a wild ass and unhitched an onager’s halter,
6 Of which I have made desert the home, alkali plains the habitation?
7 It laughs at town noises, hears no vociferations of a driver.
8 It explores mountains as its pasture and searches after any green thing.
9 Will a ure be willing to work for you or come to your crib for the night?
10 Will you tie a yoke on him with cords or will he harrow vales after you?
11 Will you put confidence in him because his strength is great,and leave to him the results of your toil?
12 Will you rely on him to come back, get in your seed to your threshing-floor?
13 An ostrich’s wing is for pleasure; or is it a kindly pinion and plume,
14 When she leaves her eggs on the ground and warms them on the earth,
15 And has forgotten that feet will smash them and wild animals tread them to pieces?
16 She is hardhearted to her young as if they were not hers; her labor goes for nothing without alarming her,
17 Because God has made her unmindful of wisdom and given her no allowance of sense.
18 The minute she goes off high she laughs at the pony and its rider.
19 Do you give the ponies mettle? do you clothe their necks with mane?
20 Do you set them in commotion like grasshoppers? the thrill of their snorting is a terror.
21 They paw in the vale and are joyous, go out in strength to meet an armament,
22 Laugh at terrors and are not dismayed, and do not turn back before swords.
23 On them ring quiver, spearhead, and javelin.
24 Twitching and fidgeting they pit the earth and do not believe there is a sound of a ram-horn.
25 At every ram-horn they say ‘Ha!’ and scent battle afar, thunder of captains and cheering.
26 Is it by your sagacity a hawk takes wing, soars off to the south,
27 Or is it by your direction that a vulture goes high and that it sets its nest aloft,
28 Perches on a crag and spends the night on a crag-tooth and a fastness,
29 Searches from there for food, its eyes looking far away,
30 And feeds its chicks with blood, and where there are corpses, there the bird is?”
40:1-24
40 And Jehovah answered Job
2 “Does an admonisher dispute with Shaddai? let him who corrects God answer it.”
3 And Job answered Jehovah
4 “Here I am, insignificant what reply should I make?
I lay my hand on my mouth.
5 I did speak once, but will not answer and twice; but I will do it no more.”
6 And Jehovah answered Job out of a tempest
7 “Gird your loins like a man so that I may ask you questions and you inform me.
8 Will you even quash my judgment, hold me in the wrong so that you may be in the right?
9 Or do you have an arm like God’s, do you thunder with a voice like his?
10 Bedeck yourself with dignity and sublimity, robing yourself in majesty and splendor,
11 Hurl the rages of your anger, and see every proud one and bring him low,
12 See every overweening one and humble him, crumple wrong-doers where they stand,
13 Bury them in the ground together, envelop their faces in sod,
14 And I too will praise you that your right hand has made good your cause.
15 Here is Behemoth, that I made with you; it eats grass like cattle.
16 Here is the strength in its back and the vigor in the muscles of its belly.
17 It holds its tail stiff as a cedar; the sinews of its hams are ropy.
18 Its bones are copper pipes, its backbone like a bar of iron.
19 First of Deity’s undertakings is this, made as he was bringing on his chisel.
20 For mountains bear growth for it, and all beasts of the wilds play there.
21 Under jujube-trees it lies, in a blind of reeds and morass,
22 Jujube-trees cover it with its shade, arroyo poplars surround it.
23 Suppose a river overflows, it is not nervous; it is undaunted though a Jordan bursts against its mouth;
24 In its eyes it takes it; it has its nose bored with baits.
41:1-34
41 Will you pull Leviathan about with a fishhook and press its tongue down with a line?
2 Will you run a rush through its nose and punch its gills with a thorn?
3 Will it give you profuse appeals for grace, or speak submissively to you?
4 Will it make terms with you and you take it as permanent slave?
5 Will you play with it as you would with a bird and tie it up for your girls,
6 Cooperators bargain over it, divide it between dealers?
7 Will you fill its skin with darts, its head with fish-harpoons?
8 Lay your hand on it, think of fighting do not try it again.
9 Here his expectation has been belied, at the very sight of it he is sent flying,
10 He is not fierce enough to rouse it and who will stand his ground before me?
11 Who has confronted me and come off safe and sound? under all the sky mine he is.
12 I will not be silent as to its members,and the matter of powerfulness, and the symmetry of its build.
13 Who uncovers the surface of its coat? who will get inside its double coat of mail?
14 Who opens the doors of its mouth? the circuit of its teeth is a terror.
15 Its back is ridged with shields, closed in tight sealing,
16 One coming up to another with no gap intervening,
17 Each keeping contact with the next, inseparably linked.
18 Its sneezing sends beams of light and its eyes are like the eyelashes of the dawn;
19 Out of its mouth fly torches, sparks of fire escape;
20 Out of its nostrils smoke streams out like that from a heated pot and rushes.
21 Its breath sets coals ablaze, and a flame comes out of its mouth.
22 Force lodges on its neck and despair bounds before it.
23 The underparts of its flesh cling fast, are immovably welded on.
24 Its heart is solid as a stone and solid as a lower millstone.
25 At its rearing up heroes quail, at bone-breaking strokes they fall into dismay.
26 One who hits it with a sword finds that that does not bite, a spear nor a bolt nor a mail-piercer.
27 It thinks iron is threshed straw and bronze rotten wood.
28 A shaft from a bow will not put it to flight; stones from a sling turn to straw for it.
29 A club counts as a straw for it, and it laughs at the vibration of a javelin.
30 Under it are sharp chips of crockery; it runs a toothed plank over mud.
31 It makes ooze boil up like a pot, makes sea like a perfumer’s saucepan.
32 It leaves a shining wake behind it; one thinks the deep is gray-haired.
33 Over the earth there is nothing that masters it, it that is made to be without dismay.
34 Every high one fears it; it is king over all proud beasts.?
42:1-17
42 And Job answered Jehovah
2 “I know that you can do everything and nothing you may think of is impossible to you.
3 Who is this that is muddling a discussion without knowing anything about it? so I have been asserting things I do not understand, things too mysterious for me, which I do not know:
4 ‘Listen, and I will speak; I will put questions; inform me.’
5 I had heard of you by hearsay, but now my eye has seen you;
6 Therefore I recant and repent in the ashes on the ground.”
7 And after Jehovah had spoken these words to Job, Jehovah said to Eliphaz the Temanite “I am angry with you and your two friends because you did not speak soundly about me as my servant Job did.
8 Now take seven steers and seven rams and go to my servant Job and offer them as burnt-offering for yourselves and let my servant Job pray for you, and see if I will do him the personal favor of not ill-treating you because you did not speak soundly of me as my servant Job did.”
9 And Eliphaz the Temanite and Bildad the Shuhite and Sophar the Naʽamathite went and did as Jehovah had told them to, and Jehovah did do the favor for Job.
10 And Jehovah came back to Job when he prayed for his friends; and Jehovah added double to everything that belonged to him.
11 And all his brothers and sisters and all his former acquaintances came to him and ate bread with him in his house and lamented over him and comforted him for all the disaster Jehovah had brought upon him, and gave him a keshitah each and a gold earring each.
12 And Jehovah blessed Job’s later life more than his earlier, and he had fourteen thousand sheep and goats and six thousand camels and a thousand yoke of cattle and a thousand donkeys;
13 and he had seven sons and three daughters,
14 and named one daughter Jemimah and the second Kesi’ah and the third Keren-hap-Puk;
15 and there were no women so beautiful as Job’s daughters to be found in all the country; and their father gave them an inheritance among their brothers.
16 And Job lived after this a hundred and forty years, and saw his sons and his sons’ sons to four generations.
17 And Job died an old man, having lived as long as he cared to.
Proverbs
1:1-33
1 The proverbs of Solomon the son of David,
king of Israel, 2 For knowing wisdom and instruction,
for understanding sentences of insight, 3 For getting instruction in the successful practice
of honesty and justice and rectitude, 4 For giving shrewdness to simpletons,
knowledge and practicality to a boy, 5 While a wise man hears and adds to his lore
and an expert acquires technique; 6 For understanding proverb and paradox,
7 Fear of Jehovah is the first thing in knowledge.
Wisdom and instruction ignoramuses despise.
8 Listen, son, to your father’s instruction,
and never abandon your mother’s teachings, 9 Because they are a becoming garland for your head
and a necklace for your throat. 10 My son, if sinners are inveigling you do not consent.
11 If they say “Come with us,
let us lay an ambush for bloodshed,
set a trap for an innocent man for nothing;
12 We shall swallow them alive like the grave, sound and whole like men going down to the world below;
13 We shall come across all sorts of valuable goods,
fill our houses with booty; 14 You shall get an even split, we will have one purse for all,”
15 My son, do not walk on a road with them,
keep your foot off their path,
16 Because their feet are running to evil and hurrying to shed blood.
17 For it is for nothing that the net flutters
before the eyes of any bird, 18 And they are laying ambushes for their own blood,
setting traps for their own lives. 19 Such is the fate of whoever grasps at gain; it takes its owners’ life.
20 Wisdom holloos on the street,
sends out her voice in the squares,
21 Calls out at the crowded corners,
says her say in the city at the gates,
22 “How long, simpletons, will you love simpleness,
and cynics like to be cynical,
and fools hate knowledge?
23 You should turn back at my admonition;
I would stream my spirit for you, would make my words known to you.
24 Since I have called and you refused,
held out my hand and nobody listened, 25 And you neglected my advice
and would not have my admonition, 26 I on my part will laugh at your calamity,
will make fun when what you dread comes, 27 When what you dread comes like a thunderstorm and your calamity arrives like a gale,
when distress and hard straits come upon you; 28 Then they will call me and I will not answer,
they will go in quest of me and not find me. 29 Inasmuch as they hated knowledge
and did not choose the fear of Jehovah, 30 Would not have my advice,
despised all my admonition, 31 They shall eat out of the fruit of their courses
and have their fill out of their policies, 32 Because simpletons’ broken resolutions kill them
and fools’ faith in their luck destroys them. 33 But he who listens to me shall dwell unafraid
2 My son, if you take what I say and lay up my commands in your mind,
2 Giving a listening ear to wisdom
and directing your heart to intelligence, 3 If you call up discretion
and to intelligence you raise your voice, 4 If you hunt for it as you would for silver
and search for it as you would for buried treasure, 5 Then you shall understand the fear of Jehovah
and find the knowledge of God, 6 Because Jehovah gives wisdom;
out of his mouth come knowledge and intelligence; 7 He lays away sensible ideas for the upright,
shields those who walk conscientiously, 8 Protecting law-abiding ways
and guarding the road of the men of his friendship; 9 Then you shall understand right and justice
and fair dealing, every good line, 10 Because wisdom shall come into your heart
and knowledge be delicious to your soul; 11 Good judgment shall guard you,
intelligence shall keep you, 12 Delivering you from a bad course,
from men who talk mischief, 13 Those who leave straightforward ways
to go on roads of darkness, 14 Who are glad to do harm
and exult in mischief to a friend, 15 Whose ways are crooked
and they take dodging roads; 16 Delivering you from a stranger woman,
a smooth-talking foreigner, 17 That leaves the mate of her girlhood
and forgets the covenant of her god, 18 For her house is sinking to death
and her roads run to ghosts 19 Any who go in to her will never come back
nor reach the ways to life, 20 In order that you may walk in good men’s path
and keep to honest men’s ways, 21 Because straightforward men will people earth
and conscientious men remain in it, 22 But wrong-doers will be extirpated from earth and faithless men torn out from it.
3:1-35
3 My son, do not forget my instructions, but let your heart keep my commands,
2 Because they will add to your length of life, your years of health, and your welfare.
3 Let friendliness and loyalty never leave you,
hang them round your neck,
4 And find favor and a reputation for judiciousness
in the eyes of God and men. 5 Trust in Jehovah with all your heart
and do not lean on your own expertness; 6 Along all your courses know him
and he will keep your ways straight. 7 Do not feel as if you were wise;
fear Jehovah and steer clear of what is bad;
8 It will be medicine for your navel
and juice for your bones. 9 Honor Jehovah out of your means
and out of the first of all your produce, 10 And have your barns filled with foodstuffs
and your vats bursting with grape-juice. 11 Do not reject Jehovah’s discipline, my son,
nor chafe at his correction, 12 Because it is the one Jehovah loves that he corrects
and he hurts a son who is acceptable to him. 13 Happy a man who finds wisdom
and a person who obtains intelligence, 14 Because it is a better bargain than silver,
better revenue than hard gold, 15 It is worth more than coral
and all your valuables are no equivalent for it. 16 It has long life in its right hand,
riches and honor in its left. 17 Its courses are courses of delight
and all its paths are prosperity. 18 It is bark from a tree of life for those who grasp it,
19 Jehovah laid the foundations of earth by wisdom,
fastened up the sky by intelligence;
20 By his knowledge the deeps were laid open and the heavens shed dew.
21 My son, never let them get away from your eyes;
keep sense and judgment;
22 They will make your life vital and your neck fine.
23 Then you will go your way confidently
and your toe will not stub. 24 If you sit down you will have no dread;
you will go to bed and your sleep will be sweet. 25 Do not be frightened at what simpletons dread,
nor at the storm upon wrong-doers when it comes, 26 For Jehovah will be your reliance
27 Do not withhold a kindness from the one who might receive it when it is in your power to do it.
28 Do not say to your neighbor “Go along, come again and tomorrow I will let you have some” when you have some by you.
29 Do not cook up harm for your neighbor when he is living with you unsuspiciously.
30 Do not quarrel gratuitously with people
if they have done you no harm. 31 Do not envy a rapacious man
nor choose any of his courses, 32 Because a crook is a thing Jehovah detests
but upright men stand on intimate terms with him. 33 Jehovah’s malediction is in a wrong-doer’s house,
but honest men’s home he blesses. 34 He treats cynics in cynical fashion
but favors the meek. 35 Wise men come in for glory, but disgrace makes fools conspicuous.
4:1-27
4 Hear, sons, a father’s tuition, and listen to knowledge of discretion,
2 Because I have given you good doctrine;
do not abandon my instructions. 3 For I was a son of my father’s,
a tender only child before my mother, 4 And he instructed me and said to me
“Let your heart take up my words; keep my commands and live.
5 Get wisdom, get discretion;
do not forget and do not deviate from the words of my mouth;
6 Do not abandon her but keep her;
love her and she will guard you.
7 The first thing in wisdom is Get wisdom! and pay all your assets for discretion.
8 Prize her and she will exalt you,
she will bring you to honor when you embrace her.
9 She will give your head a garland of grace,
will deliver to you a crown of grandeur.” 10 Hear, son, and receive what I say
and it will make your years of life many. 11 I have directed you on the course of wisdom
and set you on level roads: 12 In your walking your steps will not be cramped,
and if you run you will not stumble. 13 Hold fast to discipline, do not let go;
keep her, for she is your life.
14 Do not enter the path of wrong-doers nor tread the course of wicked men.
15 Disregard it, do not pass along it, sheer off from it and go past,
16 Because they do not get to sleep unless they have done something bad
and are robbed of their sleep if they do not do an injury;
17 For they feed on wrong-doing for bread and drink outrages for their wine.
18 But right-doers’ path is like the rays of light, growing lighter and lighter till it is settled day.
19 Wrong-doers’ course is like murky gloom:
they do not know what they will stumble over. 20 My son, listen to my words;
bend your ear to my sayings; 21 Do not let them get away from your eyes;
guard them in the core of your heart, 22 Because they are life for him who finds them
and soundness for all his flesh. 23 Beyond everything that you take care of keep your heart,
for out of it come springs of life. 24 Keep crookedness aloof from your mouth
and shiftiness far from your lips. 25 Let your eyes look right onward
and your gaze be directed straight before you, 26 See to the road for your feet
27 Do not turn off to right or left;
Keep your feet aloof from what is bad.
5:1-23
5 My son, listen to my wisdom,
bend your ear to my insight,
2 To be careful of sound judgment and have your lips keep knowledge;
3 For a stranger woman’s lips drip virgin honey and her throat is smoother than oil,
4 But her aftermath is bitter as wormwood, sharper than a two-edged sword.
5 Her feet are going down to death,
she plants her steps in the world below.
6 That she may not heed the path to life,
her roads wander about, she does not know how.
7 But now, sons, listen to me
and do not deviate from what my mouth tells: 8 Make your course far from her,
do not come near the door of her house, 9 For fear you should give your fortune to others
and your years to a cruel man; 10 For fear strangers should consume your strength at will
and your pains come into a foreigner’s house; 11 And in the sequel you should repent, when your flesh and muscle give out,
12 And say “How I did hate instruction
and my heart despised admonition,
13 And I did not obey my preceptors nor bend my ear to my teachers!
14 I was within a tittle of coming to the utmost harm
in the midst of assembly and congregation.” 15 Drink water out of your own cistern
and the flow out of the middle of your own well. 16 Your fountains would scatter to the street,
rills of water through the squares! 17 Let them be for you alone
and nothing for strangers with you. 18 Be your springhead blessed,
and have joy out of the wife of your youth. 19 Doe of love, ibex of grace,
her breasts shall refresh you at every time,
with love of her you shall be always maddened.
20 And why, son, should you be maddened with a stranger
and embrace a foreigner’s bosom? 21 For a man’s courses face Jehovah’s eyes,
who observes all the roads he takes. 22 His guilt will clutch him, the wrong-doer,
and he will be caught in the cords of his sin. 23 Such a one will die for lack of discipline
6:1-35
6 My son, if you have gone security to another, have struck hands with a stranger,
2 You are trapped in the word of your lips,
caught in the say of your mouth. 3 Do this, son, do, and deliver yourself, because you have got into the other man’s hand:
go cringe to the other man and bluster at him. 4 Give your eyes no sleep,
your eyelashes no slumber; 5 Break loose like a gazelle struggling out of toils
or a bird out of a fowler’s hand. 6 Go to an ant, idler,
see its courses and become wise: 7 It, that has no chieftain,
marshal, nor ruler, 8 Lays in its food in summer, gets its provisions packed away in harvesttime.
9 How long will you lie abed, idler?
when will you get up from your sleep?
10 A little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding your arms to lie abed
11 And your poverty shall come like a prowler
and your want like a man under arms. 12 A reprobate, a villain,
who quibbles, 13 Winks with his eyes, shuffles with his feet, makes signs with his fingers,
14 Has mischief in his heart, is working up harm every minute, sets quarrels going,
15 Therefore his calamity will come suddenly, he will be incurably broken all at once.
16 Six things there are that Jehovah hates,
seven that are detestable to his soul: 17 Lofty eyes, a false tongue,
and hands that shed innocent blood, 18 A heart that frames plans of villainy,
feet that run fast to what is bad, 19 A lie-blowing false witness,
and one who sets quarrels going between brothers. 20 Keep your father’s command, my son,
and never abandon your mother’s teachings; 21 Tie them over your heart always,
string them round your throat. 22 When you walk it will guide you, when you lie down it will watch over you
and you will wake up with it minding you. 23 For a command is a lamp and a teaching is light,
and the admonition of discipline is a road to life, 24 To guard you from a ruinous woman,
from the slipperiness of a foreign dame’s tongue. 25 Do not take inward pleasure in her beauty;
let her not catch you with her eyelashes, 26 Because on account of an unchaste woman one comes down to a loaf of bread,
and a man’s wife hunts dear lives. 27 Will a man take up fire into his arms
and his clothes not burn through, 28 Or will a man walk on live coals
and his feet not be burned? 29 So it is with him who goes in to another’s wife:
nobody who touches her will go free. 30 They do not despise a thief, that he steals
to fill his stomach because he is hungry; 31 But one who is found pays back sevenfold,
gives all the goods in his house. 32 One who commits adultery with a wife lacks brains;
it is a self-destroyer that does it. 33 He will get blows and dishonor,
and his ignominy will be uneffaceable. 34 For jealousy is a man’s fury, and he will be unsparing on the day of revenge;
35 He will not take any composition-money into consideration, will not consent though you offer a high price.
7:1-27
7 My son, be careful of what I say and lay up my commands in your mind.
2 Be careful of my commands and live;
and of my teaching as if of the apple of your eye. 3 Tie them to your fingers;
write them on the tablet of your heart. 4 Say to wisdom “you are my sister,”
and call discretion a relative, 5 To guard you from a stranger woman, from a foreigner that talks slippery language.
6 For I looked out of my house window,
through my lattice, 7 And I saw among the simpletons, perceived among the youngsters,
a brainless boy 8 Going along the street that went by her corner
and stepping in the direction of her house 9 In the twilight, the evening hours,
in the dead of night and the murky gloom; 10 And there coming to meet him was a woman
with a prostitute’s rig and a close heart; 11 Boisterous and wayward is she,
her feet do not perch in her house;
12 Now in the street, now in the squares, and beside every corner she lies in ambush;
13 And she caught hold of him and kissed him, said to him with a bold face
14 “I have welfare-sacrifices that must be eaten,
I paid my vows today;
15 That was why I came out to meet you,
to hunt up your face, and I have found you. 16 I have spread my couch with rugs,
striped work of Egyptian yarn, 17 I have sifted myrrh, eaglewood,
and cinnamon over my sofa. 18 Come on, we will quaff love till morning,
have a gay night with endearments, 19 Because husband is not in the house,
20 He took the moneybag with him;
he will get home the day the moon is full.”
21 She swayed him with the thoroughness of her technique,
tugged at him with the glibness of her lips
22 He suddenly goes along after her like a steer coming to the slaughter,
Or as a buck prances toward a decoy 23 till an arrow cuts open his liver; Like a bird’s hurrying into a trap
and not knowing that its life is at stake. 24 Now, sons, hear me
25 Let your hearts not run off into her roads,
do not stray along her paths,
26 Because she has stabbed down many and all her killed are a multitude.
27 Her paths are roads to the world below, going down to the chambers of death.
8:1-36
8 Is not wisdom calling
and intelligence sending out her voice?
2 On the brows of wayside eminences, at crossroads she takes her stand;
3 At the sides of gates, at the entrances of towns,
at the approaches to gateways she holloos 4 “To you, men, I call,
and my voice goes to humankind: 5 Appreciate shrewdness, simpletons;
fools, provide yourselves with brains. 6 Hear, for I will speak sound sense,
and what my lips are opened for shall be correct, 7 Because my throat breathes truth
8 All that my mouth says is on the right side,
there is nothing tricky and crooked in it,
9 It is all obvious to a man of understanding
and plain to those who find knowledge. 10 Take my instruction and not silver
knowledge is preferable to hard gold; 11 For wisdom is a better thing than coral
and all valuables are no equivalent for it. 12 I wisdom am neighbor to shrewdness and meet the knowledge of effective tactics.
13 The fear of Jehovah is the hate of what is bad;
pride and pretentiousness and a bad course and a mischief-making mouth I hate.
14 Mine are sound policies and sensible ideas;
I am discretion, mine is power. 15 By me kings reign
and potentates prescribe the right; 16 By me generals command
and nobles, all the judges of earth. 17 I love those who love me,
and those who go in quest of me will find me. 18 Riches and honor I have on hand,
goodly resources and a right-doer’s standing. 19 My fruit is better than hard gold, red gold,
and the produce I reap is preferable to silver. 20 On a highway of right I walk,
on midmost paths of justice, 21 Dispensing assets to those who love me
and filling their coffers. 22 “Jehovah framed me first in line,
foremost of his works in the past. 23 Of old I was constituted,
at first before the origins of earth. 24 When there were no deeps I came to birth,
when there were no springs, sources of water; 25 Earlier than mountains I was planted,
before hills I came to birth, 26 When he had not made earth and open spaces
and the multitudinous particles of the soil of the world. 27 When he fastened the sky I was there,
when he arched a vault over the face of the deep, 28 When he braced the ether above,
when he fortified the springs of the deep, 29 When he set his limit for the sea and water does not overstep his dictate,
30 I was master-workman at his side
And was taking my pleasure day by day, playing before him at every time,
31 Playing with nature all over his earth,
and my pleasure was among mankind. 32 And now, sons, listen to me
happy are those who keep on my courses. 33 Hear instruction and be wise,
and do not neglect it. 34 Happy a man who listens to me, attent at my doors day by day,
watching the jambs of my portal, 35 Because he who finds me has found life
and obtained favor from Jehovah, 36 But he who sins against me is victimizing himself; all who hate me love death.”
9:1-18
9 Wisdom has built her house, has shaped her pillars seven,
2 Has killed animals for her meat, mixed her wine,
set her table too, 3 Has sent her girls, calls out
on the crests of eminences in the city 4 “Who is a simpleton? let him come this way;
brainless? that I may say to him
5 ‘Come, have some of my dinner
and drink some of the wine I have mixed.
6 Leave off simpleness and have life,
and tread the road of discretion.”’ 7 He who offers instruction to a cynic gets dishonor for himself, and he who admonishes a wicked man, it is his discredit.
8 Do not admonish a cynic, for fear he should hate you;
admonish a wise man and he will love you.
9 Give to a wise man and he will be wiser yet;
advise a right-minded man and he will add to his lore.
10 The beginning of wisdom is to fear Jehovah,
and to know the Holy is discretion. 11 For by me your days shall be many
and years of life shall be added to you. 12 If you are wise, you are wise for yourself; and are you cynical, you will carry the consequences alone.
13 Foolishness is boisterous;
simplemindedness knows no shame;
14 And she sits at the door of her house,
in a chair on eminences in the city, 15 To call to passersby, those who are treading their ways,
16 “Who is a simpleton? let him come this way;
and brainless? that I may say to him
17 ‘Stolen water is sweet and bread behind a screen is delicious’”
18 But he does not know there are ghosts there; her guests are in the deeps of the realm of death.
10:1-32
10 The Proverbs of Solomon.
A wise son gladdens a father, but a foolish son is misery to his mother.
2 A wrong-doer’s hoards do no good, but right-doing delivers from death.
3 Jehovah will not let a right-doer go hungry, but wrong-doers’ hankering he will balk.
4 He who does things with slack hand grows poor;
but energetic men’s hands enrich. 5 A capable son is stowing things away in summer;
a worthless son lies fast asleep in harvesttime. 6 There are blessings for a right-doer’s head,
but outrage covers up wrong-doers’ mouths. 7 The memory of a right-doer is for a blessing,
but wrong-doers’ names will decay. 8 A man of wise heart takes orders,
but a man of ignorant lips makes trouble. 9 One who walks plainly walks safely,
but one who tangles his courses will be shown up. 10 A winker gives woe,
but an outspoken reprover brings soundness. 11 An honest man’s mouth is a fountainhead of life;
but outrage covers up wrong-doers’ mouths. 12 Hate starts quarrels,
but love covers over all offenses. 13 On an intelligent man’s lips wisdom is found;
but a cudgel is the thing for a brainless man’s back. 14 Wise men keep knowledge under cover;
but an ignorant man’s mouth is ruin close at hand. 15 A rich man’s goods are his strong city;
the destitution of poor men is their ruin. 16 What a right-doer has worked on goes for life;
a wrong-doer’s produce, for sin. 17 He who lives up to lessons is on a road to life,
but he who ignores admonition is off the track. 18 Lying lips cover up hatred;
but he who gives out scandal is a fool. 19 In multiplicity of words offense will not be lacking;
but he who keeps his lips under restraint is acting sensibly. 20 An honest man’s tongue is sterling silver;
wrong-doers’ brains are worth little. 21 An honest man’s lips shepherd many;
but ignoramuses die by lack of brains. 22 Jehovah’s blessing is what makes one rich,
and pains add nothing extra. 23 Committing enormity is just fun to a fool,
and so is wisdom to an intelligent man. 24 What a wrong-doer stands in terror of is what will come to him;
but honest men’s desire will be granted. 25 When a gale has gone past, a wrong-doer is not there;
but an honest man is permanently fixed on his foundation. 26 As is vinegar to the teeth and as is smoke to the eyes,
so is the idler to those who send him. 27 The fear of Jehovah adds days;
but wrong-doers’ years will be shortened. 28 Right-doers’ prospect is gladness;
but wrong-doers’ hope will be lost. 29 Jehovah is a citadel to a man of conscientious course
but ruin to villains. 30 A right-doer will be unshaken forever, but wrong-doers will not have a lodgment in the country.
31 A right-doer’s mouth bears crops of wisdom,
but a mischief-making tongue will be cut out. 32 A right-doer’s lips know courtesy,
11:1-31
11 Cheating scales are what Jehovah detests,
and a full-standard weight is what he approves. 2 Comes pretentiousness, comes dishonor;
but wisdom is on the side of modest men. 3 Straightforward men’s conscientiousness will guide them,
but faithless men will be upset by their wickedness. 4 Property does no good on a day of wrath,
but right-doing delivers from death. 5 A conscientious man’s rectitude will smooth his course,
but a wrong-doer will fall by his tendency to wrong. 6 Straightforward men’s rectitude will deliver them,
but faithless men will be caught by their greed. 7 At man’s death hope perishes
and the prospect vigor gave is lost. 8 An honest man is rescued out of distress
and a rogue goes in instead. 9 By an ungodly man’s mouth his neighbor is ruined,
but by knowledge honest men are rescued. 10 When good things happen to honest men a town jubilates,
but when rogues perish there is shouting. 11 By upright men’s blessing a town stands tall,
but by rogues’ mouths it is demolished. 12 A brainless man despises his neighbor,
but an intelligent man holds his tongue. 13 A tattler discloses confidences,
but a man of trusty spirit covers a matter up. 14 By not having political skill a people falls;
but preservation comes by plenty of advisers. 15 One comes to grievous harm because he has gone security for a stranger;
but he who hates hand-strikers has nothing to fear. 16 A gracious woman holds honor,
but aggressive men will control riches. 17 A friendly man is befriending himself;
but a cruel man is breeding trouble for his own flesh. 18 A wrong-doer makes illusory revenue,
but he who sows the seed of right, real wages. 19 Firmness in the right makes for life;
but one who chases after evil does this for his own death. 20 Men crooked in their hearts are what Jehovah detests,
and men conscientious in their courses are what he approves. 21 Hand on hand a vicious man will not be cleared,
but right-doers’ descendants escape. 22 A beautiful but wrong-headed woman
is a gold ring in a hog’s nose. 23 Honest men’s desire is pure kindness,
but rogues’ hope is truculence. 24 There is such a thing as one who scatters but has more and more;
but one who scrimps unduly is headed only for want. 25 A generous soul will get plenty of oil,
and a man who gives water freely, plenty of water for himself. 26 One who refuses to sell grain the people will curse,
but there will be blessings for the head of one who does sell it. 27 One who goes after good is going to find God’s favor,
and one who hunts for harm will have it come to him. 28 He who puts confidence in his riches, he will fall,
but right-doers will bud out like leaves. 29 One who breeds trouble for his house will have an estate of air;
and an ignoramus is slave to a man with a wise brain. 30 The fruit of right-doing is bark from a tree of life,
but rascality takes lives away. 31 Here an honest man has a narrow margin of well-being how much more a rogue and sinner!
12:1-28
12 One who loves being instructed loves knowledge; but one who hates being corrected goes stupid.
2 A kindly man will obtain favor from Jehovah,
but a schemer he will condemn. 3 Man is not set firm by wrong-doing;
but right-doers’ roots are unshaken. 4 A worthy wife is her husband’s crown,
but a worthless one is like a rot in his bones. 5 Honest men’s plans are for legitimate procedure;
rogues’ tactics are fraud. 6 Rogues’ words are an ambush for bloodshed,
but upright men’s mouths deliver them. 7 Upset rogues and they are nowhere;
but honest men’s house will stand. 8 A man will be praised in proportion to his good judgment;
but a dizzy-headed man will come into contempt. 9 A nobody who owns a slave
is better than a pretentious man short of bread to eat. 10 A right-minded man knows the wants of his animal;
but vicious men’s feelings are brutal. 11 One who works his ground will have plenty of bread;
but one who runs after unpractical things lacks brains. 12 Love for wrong-doing is a net for bad men;
but honest men’s root is permanent. 13 In crime of the lips is a disastrous snare,
but an honest man gets out of the pinch. 14 Out of the fruit of a man’s mouth he will have his fill of good,
and the dealing of one’s hands will come back to him. 15 A know-nothing’s course seems all right to him,
but he who listens to advice is wise. 16 A know-nothing’s pique is displayed on the spot,
but a shrewd man covers up a dishonor. 17 Who utters reliable facts shows the right;
but a false-speaking witness, a cheat. 18 There is such a thing as a man whose jabber is like sword-stabs;
but wise men’s tongue is healing. 19 A lip of truth will stand fast forevermore,
but a tongue of falsehood for an instant. 20 There is double-dealing in the hearts of those who are cooking up harm,
but those who confer on wholesome policy have happiness. 21 No trouble will be brought upon a right-doer;
but wrong-doers are full of evil. 22 Lips of falsehood are what Jehovah detests,
but men who act truly are what he approves. 23 A shrewd man covers up knowledge,
but fools’ hearts bawl ignorance. 24 Energetic men’s hands will have control,
but slackness will come to servitude. 25 Worry in a man’s heart depresses it,
but thinking of a good thing gladdens it. 26 A right-doer will hunt up his pasture,
but the course wrong-doers are on will make them lose their way. 27 Slackness does not broil his game;
but energy treats a man’s goods as worth caring for. 28 On the highway of right there is life,
13 A wise son a father’s instruction,
but a cynic hears not a rebuke. 2 Out of the fruit of a man’s mouth he will eat good,
but faithless men’s appetite is for outrage. 3 He who keeps watch of his mouth is guarding his life;
he who throws his lips open comes to ruin. 4 An idler has an appetite and finds nothing,
but energetic men’s appetite will find plenty of oil. 5 An honest man hates a false word,
but a rogue leaves you disappointed and abashed. 6 Right-doing keeps safe a man of conscientious course,
but sin upsets wrong-doers. 7 There are such things as a man who makes himself out rich and there is nothing at all there,
of goods. 8 A man’s riches buy off his life;
but a poor man hears not a rebuke. 9 Right-doers’ light is merry, and wrong-doers’ lamp goes out.
10 A man with nothing in him will start a squabble by self-will; but wisdom is with men who take advice.
11 Property got together in a rush will shrink; but one who gathers bit by bit will make much.
12 An expectation long drawn out breeds sickness in the heart; but a desire that comes true is bark from a tree of life.
13 One who despises a word will have to give security; but one who fears a commandment, he will go safe.
14 A wise man’s precept is a spring of life
for keeping away from the snares of death. 15 Tact gives charm;
but faithless men’s course is to perdition. 16 Any shrewd man acts by knowledge;
but a fool spreads out ignorance. 17 An unscrupulous messenger tumbles one into disaster,
but a trustworthy courier is healing. 18 Poverty and dishonor, who neglects instruction;
but one who observes admonition will come to high standing. 19 A desire realized is sweet to the soul;
but avoiding anything bad is what fools detest. 20 Go with wise men and become wise;
but one who cultivates fools will come to harm. 21 Disaster pursues sinners,
but comfortable prosperity rests with honest men. 22 A good man will bequeath an inheritance to children’s children,
but a sinner’s wealth is stored away for an honest man. 23 Plenty of food, poor men’s sod-breaking;
but there is such a thing as one that is swept away without justice. 24 He who holds back his stick hates his son,
but he who loves him goes in quest of it as a discipline. 25 A right-doer eats all his appetite wants,
14 Women’s wisdom builds its house, but foolishness is demolishing it with her own hands.
2 He who fears Jehovah goes straightforwardly, but he who despises him takes dodging courses.
3 In a know-nothing’s mouth there is a switch for his own back, but wise men’s lips guard them safe.
4 With no cattle there is a clean manger, but there is plenty of produce by a horned beast’s strength.
5 A trustworthy witness will not lie, but a false witness breathes lies.
6 A cynic hunts for wisdom and does not find any,
but knowledge is an easy thing to a man of sense. 7 Go face to face with a foolish man,
and you have not known lips of knowledge. 8 A shrewd man’s wisdom consists in understanding his course;
but the stupidity of fools, in cheating. 9 Reprobates’ homes are held guilty,
but upright men’s houses are accepted. 10 A heart knows its own grief,
and a stranger does not mix in its gladness. 11 Wrong-doers’ house will be rooted out,
12 There is such a thing as a road that lies smooth before a man but the last part of it is the recesses of death.
13 Even in laughter a heart will feel pain, and the sequel of gladness is sorrow.
14 A man of recreant heart will have his fill out of his courses, and a good man out of his practices.
15 A simpleton believes every word, but a shrewd man considers his steps.
16 A wise man is afraid and gets out of the way of harm,
but a fool is hotheaded and confident. 17 A quick-tempered man acts foolishly,
but a practical man bears. 18 Simpletons come in for an estate of ignorance,
but shrewd men crown themselves with knowledge. 19 Bad men are brought low before good men
and wrong-doers are at a right-doer’s gates. 20 A poor man is hateful even to his friend;
but there are many to love a rich man. 21 One who despises his neighbor is sinning,
22 Practitioners of evil are on the wrong track indeed,
but practitioners of good work in friendship and loyalty.
23 By any hard work there will be a clear profit;
but lip-talk comes only to a deficit. 24 Wise men’s crown is shrewdness,
but fools’ garland is foolishness. 25 A true witness is a lifesaver,
but a lie-blower is a disappointment. 26 In the fear of Jehovah is a strong reliance,
and to one’s children that will be a refuge. 27 The fear of Jehovah is a spring of life
for keeping away from the snares of death. 28 In the numerousness of a people is a king’s majesty,
but in lack of folk is a potentate’s ruin. 29 A patient man shows great intelligence,
but an impatient man conspicuous foolishness. 30 A placid heart is life in the flesh,
but passion is a rot in the bones. 31 One who denies a poor man his rights is insulting him who made him;
but he who is honoring him shows favor to a needy one. 32 A rogue is knocked over by his viciousness,
but an honest man finds refuge in his conscientious life. 33 In a sensible man’s heart wisdom rests,
but in fools’ bosoms it is known. 34 Right-doing uplifts a nation,
but sin is a disgrace to any folk. 35 A capable official will have a king’s approval, but a worthless one will be his rage.
15 A soft answer wards off ill temper, but a harsh word brings up anger.
2 Wise men’s tongues know what is what, but fools’ mouths stream ignorance.
3 Jehovah’s eyes are in every place, keeping a lookout over bad men and good.
4 Calmness of tongue is bark from a tree of life, but upsetting in it means a fracture in the spirit.
5 A know-nothing is contemptuous of his father’s training,
but one who observes admonition will grow shrewd. 6 A right-doer’s house has in it plenty of capital;
but in a wrong-doer’s produce trouble breeds. 7 Wise men’s lips sprinkle knowledge,
but fools’ hearts are not right. 8 Wrong-doers’ sacrifice is what Jehovah abominates,
but upright men’s prayer is what he accepts. 9 What Jehovah abominates is a wrong-doer’s course;
but a pursuer of right he loves. 10 A path-leaver gets hard discipline; a hater of admonition will die.
11 The world of the dead, the land of the gone forever, are present before Jehovah;
much more the hearts of human beings.
12 A cynic does not love being admonished;
he does not go to wise men.
13 A glad heart does good to the face;
but with pain at heart comes a broken-down spirit. 14 A sensible heart hunts up knowledge,
but fools’ mouths pasture on ignorance. 15 All a doleful man’s days are bad,
but a cheery man is a banquet all the time. 16 Better a little in the fear of Jehovah
than a great store and everything going wrong in it. 17 Better a dish of greens when love is there
than a stall-fed cow and hate about it. 18 A hot-tempered man sets quarrels going,
but a patient man quiets a dispute down. 19 An idler’s path is like a thorn hedge;
but downright men’s route is a made road. 20 A wise son gladdens a father,
but a fool despises his mother. 21 Foolishness is bliss to a brainless man,
but an intelligent man will go straight. 22 Frustration of plans comes by not going into conference,
but by plenty of advisers they will go through. 23 A man enjoys having given a pat answer;
and what a good thing a well-timed word is! 24 A canny man holds an upward path to life,
to shun the realm of death below. 25 Jehovah sweeps off proud men’s house,
but sets in place a widow’s boundary-mark. 26 A bad man’s ideas are what Jehovah detests,
but pure men’s say is delightful. 27 One who grasps at gain is breeding trouble for his house,
but one who hates gifts will live. 28 A right-doer’s heart studies to give an answer,
but wrong-doers’ mouths stream viciousness. 29 Jehovah is far from wrong-doers
but hears right-doers’ prayer. 30 Shining eyes gladden a heart,
and good news puts fat in one’s bones. 31 An ear that can hear admonition is life;
32 One who neglects instruction thinks nothing of his own being; but one who listens to admonition is getting brains.
33 Fear of Jehovah is a discipline in wisdom, and humility is antecedent to dignity.
16 Man’s are cogitations of the heart, but from Jehovah is the answer for the tongue.
2 A man feels as if all his courses were irreproachable,
but Jehovah gauges spirits. 3 Turn your affairs over to Jehovah
and have your plans confirmed. 4 Jehovah made everything to play its part, and even a wrong-doer for a day of disaster.
5 Any pretentious man is what Jehovah detests;
hand on hand he will not be cleared.
6 By friendliness and loyalty guilt is purged,
and by fearing Jehovah one avoids what is bad. 7 When Jehovah approves a man’s courses
he makes even his enemies live on good terms with him. 8 Better a little by right
than a large income by injustice. 9 Man’s heart plans his course
but Jehovah places his steps. 10 Clairvoyance sits on a king’s lips;
in giving judgment his mouth will not play false. 11 Steelyard and scales are matter for Jehovah’s judgment;
all standard weights are his work. 12 The doing of wrong is a thing kings abominate, because it is by right that a throne is made firm.
13 Right-speaking lips are what a king approves,
and one who speaks straightforwardly he loves.
14 A king’s ire means messengers of death,
and a wise man will appease it. 15 In cheerfulness on a king’s face there is life, and his approval is like a spring rain-cloud.
16 Get wisdom; how much better it is than hard gold!
and getting discretion is preferable to silver.
17 Avoidance of evil is straightforward men’s highway;
he who watches his course is guarding his life.
18 Pride goes before a crash and a pretentious spirit before a tumble.
19 Better lowliness of spirit in humble men’s company
than dividing booty with proud men. 20 One who handles a matter cannily will have good results;
but one who trusts in Jehovah, happy he! 21 A wise-hearted man will be called a sage, but pleasingness of lips will add to influence.
22 The insight of those who have insight is a fountain of life, but ignoramuses’ lecturing is ignorance.
23 A wise man’s heart makes his mouth skillful
and adds to the influence of his lips. 24 Pleasant words are a comb of honey,
sweetness for the palate and health for the bones. 25 There is such a thing as a road that lies smooth before a man
but the last part of it is the recesses of death. 26 A hardworking man’s appetite works for him,
because his mouth sees to his working. 27 A reprobate is a furnace of harm
and has on his lip what is like a searing fire. 28 A mischief-maker starts quarrels
and a scandalmonger alienates a bosom friend. 29 A scoundrel inveigles his friend
30 One who shuts his eyes tight is thinking up mischief;
one who moves his lips has got up something bad.
31 White hair is a magnificent coronet;
it will be found by a course of right-doing. 32 A patient man is better than a champion fighter,
and one who has command over his spirit than one who takes a city. 33 The lot is tossed in the fold of your mantle,
17:1-28
17 Better a dry morsel and a quiet life by it than a house full of dinner from ill-will sacrifices.
2 A capable slave will have control over a worthless son and will share inheritance among brothers.
3 Crucible for silver and furnace for gold, but he who assays hearts is Jehovah.
4 He is a malefactor who listens eagerly to a villainous lip;
it is falsehood that gives ear to a malignant tongue. 5 One who jeers at a poor man is insulting him who made him;
one who is glad at calamity will not be held innocent. 6 Grandchildren are old men’s coronet;
7 A grandiloquent lip is not becoming to a rascal;
much less a falsifying lip to a noble.
8 A bribe shows itself to its user as a favor-charm:
whatever he faces toward, he succeeds. 9 One who is looking for love covers up an offense;
but one who harps on a matter alienates a bosom friend. 10 A rebuke sinks deeper into a man of sense
than a hundred cuts with a stick into a fool. 11 A bad man seeks merely insubordination,
and will have a cruel messenger let loose on him. 12 Let a man encounter a bear that has lost her cubs
but not a fool in his ignorance. 13 One who returns bad for good
will never have his house without bad. 14 The beginning of a quarrel is somebody letting a trickle start,
so give up your side of the dispute before anybody gets into a rage. 15 One who declares a man right when he is wrong and one who declares him wrong when he is right
are both of them things that Jehovah detests. 16 Why should a fool have in his hands a fee
to buy wisdom when he has no brains? 17 The friend loves at every time,
but a brother is born for distress. 18 A brainless man strikes hands, pledges a security before another.
19 One who loves a squabble loves a bruise;
one who makes his doorway tall is asking for a crash.
20 A man with a crooked heart will come to no good, and a man with a reversible tongue will fall into disaster.
21 To one who begets a fool it becomes a sorrow,
and a rascal’s father will not be glad. 22 A glad heart gives good healing,
but a broken-down spirit dries out a bone. 23 A bribe is taken out of a rogue’s pocket
to warp the courses of justice. 24 Wisdom is face to face with a man of sense, but a fool’s eyes are at earth’s end.
25 A foolish son is a vexation to his father
and a bitterness to her who gave him birth. 26 Even fining an honest man is not good,
giving beatings to noble men for uprightness. 27 One who restrains his speech knows what is what,
and one with a cool spirit is a man of intelligence. 28 Even an ignoramus holding his tongue will be thought wise;
18 An alienated friend hunts for something to wrangle over
and flies into a rage at any sane word. 2 A fool has no fancy for good sense,
but for venting his ideas. 3 When wickedness comes in, contempt comes in too;
4 The words of a man’s mouth are deep water,
the fountain of wisdom a dashing stream.
5 It is not a good thing to allow personal favor to a wrong-doer,
giving the go-by to a right-doer in judgment. 6 A fool’s lips bring strife
and his mouth invites pounding. 7 A fool’s mouth is his ruin
and his lips a snare for his life. 8 A scandalmonger’s words are like the seeping of water,
and they run down into the deepest recesses of the body. 9 One who is even slack in his business
10 Jehovah’s name is a tower of shelter;
in it an honest man runs in and is out of reach of harm.
11 A rich man’s goods are his strong city and as by a wall he is safe from harm by their hedge.
12 Before a crash a man’s thoughts are high,
but before honor goes humility. 13 For one who answers before he hears
the upshot is irrelevance and humiliation. 14 A man’s spirit weathers his ailment,
but who is to carry the load of a broken-down spirit? 15 An intelligent man’s heart gets in knowledge
and wise men’s ears hunt up sound judgment. 16 A man’s gift makes room for him
and introduces him before big men. 17 The man who states his case first is all right,
but the other party comes in and probes him. 18 The lot puts an end to quarrels
and separates formidable opponents. 19 A brother is more of a salvation than a strong city,
and kinsfolk are equal to castle bars. 20 Out of the fruit of a man’s mouth his stomach will have its fill,
and of the produce of his lips he will get all he can hold. 21 Death and life are in the hands of the tongue,
and those who love it will eat the fruit of it. 22 Who has found a wife has found a good thing
and obtained favor from Jehovah. 23 A poor man talks beseechingly,
a rich man answers imperiously. 24 There are friends for company, and there is such a thing as a loving friend that sticks tighter than a brother.
19 Better a poor man leading a conscientious life than a man of crooked lips, he being a fool.
2 When a soul has not knowledge it is not good either,
and one who is in haste with his feet goes wrong. 3 A man’s ignorance muddles his affairs
and he flies out against Jehovah. 4 Possessions add many friends;
but a poor man is parted from the friend he has. 5 A false witness will not be held guiltless
nor a lie-blower come off scot-free. 6 Many curry favor with a nobleman,
and everybody is friend to a free giver. 7 All a poor man’s brothers hate him;
and one who rebels against words will not come off safe.
8 One who invests in brains loves his life;
one who takes care for intelligence is going to find good.
9 A false witness will not be held guiltless
and a lie-blower will perish. 10 Luxury is not befitting for a fool;
much less is ruling over generals for a slave. 11 For a man to exercise patience is good business, and to pass over offenses is an adornment to him.
12 A king’s displeasure is a growl like a two-year-old lion’s, and his approval is like dew on herbage.
13 A foolish son is a catastrophe to his father, and a woman’s wrangles are a steadily dribbling leak in the roof.
14 A house and goods are an inheritance from parents,
but a wife who minds her business is from Jehovah. 15 Laziness throws one into a trance,
and a slacker’s appetite will go hungry. 16 One who keeps a commandment is keeping his life safe,
17 One who does a kindness to a poor man is lending to Jehovah, and he will pay him back in kind.
18 Chastise your son, because there is a hope, and do not expect to kill him.
19 A man with too hot a temper has to pay the penalty, for if you interfere you make things still worse.
20 Listen to advice and accept instruction,
in order that you may be wise in future. 21 A man has plenty of ideas in his mind,
but Jehovah’s plan is what stands. 22 A man’s goodwill is his friendliness,
and a poor man is better than a liar. 23 Fearing Jehovah leads to life,
and one passes the night with a full stomach, unvisited by harm. 24 An idler has buried his hand in the dish,
25 You give a cynic a beating, and a simpleton grows shrewder; one admonishes a man of sense, and he sees the point.
26 A worthless and disgraceful son lays waste his father’s house and makes his mother a fugitive.
27 Beware, my son, of listening to instruction to err from ways of knowledge.
28 An unscrupulous witness takes a cynic’s view of justice,
and wrong-doers’ mouths stream villainy. 29 Whips are ready for cynics
20:1-30
20 Wine is cynical, beer is noisy, and anyone who misconducts himself by it is unwise.
2 The terror of a king is a growl like a two-year-old lion’s; he who angers him sins against his own life.
3 It is an honor to a man to keep out of contention;
but every know-nothing flies into rages. 4 An idler does not do his plowing in the fall,
asks in harvesttime, and there is nothing there. 5 A purpose in a man’s heart is water deep down,
but a man of intelligence draws it. 6 Plenty of men will each proclaim his friendship,
7 Who conscientiously walks an honest man’s course,
happy his children after him!
8 A king sitting in the chair of judgment winnows with his eyes everything bad.
9 Who shall say “I have cleared my heart, I am clean from my sin”?
10 Two standards of weight, two standards of bushel,
both are things Jehovah detests. 11 Even in his play a boy shows what he is,
whether his doings are clean and straightforward. 12 Ear that hears and eye that sees,
Jehovah made them both. 13 Do not love sleep, or you will come to poverty;
open your eyes and have all the bread you can eat.
14 “Bad, bad,” says the buyer;
but he goes off, then he brags.
15 There is such a thing as gold and such a thing as plenty of coral, but a thing that is valuable is lips of knowledge.
16 Take his garment, because he went security for a stranger; foreclose him on foreigners’ account.
17 The bread of falsehood tastes fine to a man, but afterward his mouth gets full of gravel.
18 Ideas become effective by forethought;
make war with competent generalship. 19 A tattler discloses confidences;
do not be mixed up with a loose-tongued man. 20 Who curses his father and his mother,
his lamp will go out into utter darkness. 21 An estate that was originally got in a rush
will not have its future blessed. 22 Do not say “I will pay back” a bad turn;
set your hope on Jehovah and he will help you out.
23 Two standards of weight are a thing Jehovah detests, and cheating scales are not a good thing.
24 The places where a man sets his foot come from Jehovah;
what does a human being understand of his course?
25 It is a man-trap to say “Given to God” carelessly,
or to do sorting out after vows.
26 A wise king winnows wrong-doers and brings their villainy down on them.
27 Man’s breath is Jehovah’s lamp searching all recesses of the body.
28 Friendliness and good faith safeguard a king, and he braces his throne by right dealing.
29 Young men’s magnificence is their strength; old men’s grandeur is white hair.
30 A whipping that draws blood is a scouring off of viciousness, and lashes the brain-cells.
21:1-31
21 A king’s heart is in Jehovah’s hands a set of irrigation-streams
which he turns upon what he chooses.
2 A man feels as if all his course were correct,
but Jehovah gauges hearts. 3 Doing the right and lawful thing
is for Jehovah preferable to a sacrifice. 4 Loftiness in the eyes and extensiveness in the thought,
wicked men’s undertakings are sin. 5 An industrious man’s plans work out all to abundance;
but anybody who is in a hurry, all to shortage. 6 One who accumulates property by false pretenses
is chasing after a wisp of vapor into snares of death. 7 Wrong-doers’ violence drags them along
because they have not been willing to do the lawful thing. 8 One who is tortuous in his course is a foul man;
but a clean man’s doings are straightforward. 9 Better to live on the corner of a roof
than a home shared with a quarrelsome woman. 10 A wrong-doer’s appetite craves evil;
he has no kindness for his fellowman. 11 By punishment of a cynic a simpleton gets wisdom,
but when a wise man is given good advice he sees the point. 12 A right-doer does his best by a wrong-doer’s house;
a wrecker of wrong-doers is bound to come to grief. 13 He who stops his ears against a poor man’s cry,
he too shall call out and not be answered. 14 A gift in private parries anger,
and a present slipped into the pocket heat of temper. 15 The doing of justice is gladness to an honest man,
but dismay to villains. 16 A man who wanders off the road of reason
will come to his rest in the throng of ghosts. 17 One who loves merrymaking is a man of privations;
one does not get rich who loves wine and oil. 18 A wrong-doer pays a penalty for a right-doer,
and a faithless man is a substitute for upright men. 19 Better life in a wilderness
20 An inviting treasure finds lodgment on a wise man’s premises, but a fool gobbles it up.
21 One who pursues right-dealing and friendliness
will find life and honor. 22 A wise man scales a city of champions
and brings down the strength it put its confidence in. 23 He who guards his mouth and his tongue
is guarding his life from distress. 24 A haughty, presumptuous man, whose name is cynic,
acts with the recklessness of presumption. 25 An idler’s craving is the death of him
because his hands refuse to do anything. 26 All day craving goes on craving,
but a right-doer gives and does not hold back. 27 Wrong-doers’ sacrifice is an abomination,
all the more when one brings it designedly. 28 A lying witness is lost,
but a man who has heard speaks on and on. 29 A man doing wrong shows a stiff face;
but an upright man, he sets his courses in order. 30 There is no wisdom or insight
or policy to confront Jehovah. 31 One gets ponies ready for a day of battle,
22:1-29
22 Reputation is preferable to great wealth,
popularity to silver and gold. 2 A rich man and a poor man meet
Jehovah is the maker of all. 3 A sagacious man sees an evil and gets under cover, but simpletons go ahead and will pay the penalty.
4 The sequel of humility is fear of Jehovah, riches, honor, and life.
5 There are thorns and traps in a crooked man’s road; he who is guarding his life will keep aloof from them.
6 Give a boy the start his course requires;
even when he grows old he will not deviate from it. 7 A rich man rules over poor men,
and a borrower is slave to a lender. 8 One who sows knavery will reap trouble,
and his cudgel of wrath gives out. 9 A generous-hearted man will be blessed
because he has given bread of his to a poor man. 10 Turn out a cynic and out goes quarreling,
and dispute and dishonor come to an end. 11 Jehovah loves a clean-hearted man;
one whose lips are agreeable has a king for his friend. 12 Jehovah’s eyes watch over knowledge,
13 An idler says “There is a lion in the street,”
“I shall be murdered right out in the squares.”
14 Stranger women’s mouths are a deep pitfall;
he to whom Jehovah is hostile will fall in.
15 Foolishness is tied into a boy’s heart; the cudgel of discipline will drive it away.
16 A man refusing pay to a poor man with the result that he gets more
a man giving to a rich man with the result only of destitution. 17 Wise men’s words.
18 Because it will be delightful that you keep them within you, have them planted together on your lips.
19 That your confidence may be in Jehovah, I have made known life to you too.
20 I have written for you, as you see, thirty points
in good advice and knowledge, 21 That you may make known words of truth,
may bring back word to him who sent you. 22 Do not rob a poor man because he is poor
nor overbear a downtrodden man in the gate, 23 For Jehovah will defend their cause
24 Do not make friends with a man who easily gets angry
nor keep company with a man given to bursts of temper, 25 For fear you should get into his ways
and come to have a trap waiting for your life. 26 Do not be among those who strike hands,
those who go security for moneylenders’ loans: 27 If you do not have enough to pay,
why should he take your bed out from under you? 28 Do not displace an old-time boundary-mark
29 If you see a man getting his work done speedily
will not find his place in the service of nobodies.
23 When you sit down to eat a meal with a ruler you will take good notice what it is that is before you,
2 And you will set a knife to your chin
if you are a man of appetite. 3 Do not be greedy for his tidbits;
that is bread of false pretense. 4 Do not slave to get rich;
leave off your longheadedness.
5 Your eyes fly to it and it is not there, because riches take wing
like a vulture flying into the sky. 6 Do not take a meal with a stingy man
7 For he is just like one who has a storm in his soul:
“Eat and drink,” he will say to you, but you do not have his heart with you.
8 You will be vomiting out the mouthful you have eaten
and will have thrown away your fine words. 9 Do not talk for a fool to hear,
because he will despise the judiciousness of your words. 10 Do not displace an old-time boundary-mark
nor go into an orphan’s land, 11 Because their Guardian is strong;
it will be he that will fight out their case with you. 12 Bring instruction your heart
13 Do not let a boy go without discipline;
because you strike him with a cudgel he will not die.
14 It will be you with the cudgel that are striking him,
and you will be delivering his life from the world below. 15 My son, if your heart is wise
my own heart will be glad; 16 And my breast will exult
when your lips speak by line and level. 17 Let your heart not be emulous of sinners
but of the fear of Jehovah all day; 18 But there is a future
and your hope will not be dashed. 19 Hear this, you son of mine, and be wise,
and set your heart straight on the course. 20 Do not be among those
who drink wine and eat meat recklessly, 21 Because a reckless drinker and eater will lose everything he has
and sleepiness gives a coat of rags. 22 Listen to your father that brought you to birth,
and do not despise your mother when she grows old. 23 Buy truth, and do not sell
wisdom and training and discernment. 24 Jubilant will be a right-doer’s father,
and he who has brought to birth a wise man will be glad of him. 25 Let your father and mother be glad
and her who gave you birth jubilant. 26 Give me your attention, my son,
and have an eye to my courses, 27 Because a stranger woman is a deep pitfall
and a foreign woman is a narrow well; 28 She too lies in ambush as a highwayman does, and adds to the amount of disloyalty among men.
29 Who has “ouch”? who has “ow”?
who has quarrels? who has complaining?
Who has wounds for nothing?
who has black eyes?
30 Those who sit late over wine, those who go in to investigate mixed drinks.
31 Do not look on wine when it glows redly, when it shows its looks in the cup,
runs smoothly; 32 The future of it will be that it bites like a snake
and stings like a cobra. 33 Your eyes will see abnormal things
and your lips will speak absurd things, 34 And you will be like one lying down in mid-ocean
and like a sailor in a heavy sea. 35 “They struck me, I was not hurt;
they pounded me, I did not know it;
When shall I wake up?
24:1-34
24 Do not be emulous of bad men nor desirous of going with them,
2 Because their hearts are studying up violence
and their lips are talking of mischief. 3 A household is built up by wisdom
and kept up by intelligence, 4 And by knowledge storerooms are filled
with all sorts of valuable and enjoyable goods. 5 A wise man is more puissant than a muscular man,
and a man of knowledge than one mighty in strength; 6 For it is by generalship that war is to be made,
and victory comes by plenty of advisers. 7 Wisdom is pearls for an ignoramus;
he does not open his mouth in the gate. 8 One who lays plans for doing harm
they call a crook. 9 Stupidity’s stroke of policy is a piece of baseness,
and a cynic is detestable to man. 10 If you slacken in a pinch
your strength is a pinched-up thing. 11 Deliver those who are being taken to death
and those who are leaning over for killing; do not hold back; 12 When you say “There, we did not know this,”
will not he who gauges hearts see into it And the keeper of your life know it? and he will return to man the like of what he does.
13 Eat honey, son, because it is good and virgin honey is sweet to your palate;
14 Such know wisdom to be for your soul:
if you find it there is a future and your hope will not be dashed.
15 Do not lurk about an honest man’s quarter, rogue,
and do not raid his sleeping-place, 16 For an honest man falls seven times and gets up,
but rogues are tripped up by viciousness. 17 When your enemy falls down do not celebrate it,
and when he trips up do not let your heart exult; 18 Jehovah might see it and dislike it
and turn back his anger from him. 19 Do not get angry over bad men
nor be jealous of wrong-doers, 20 Because a wrong-doer will have no future;
21 Fear Jehovah and the king, son;
do not be mixed up with people who want a change,
22 For their calamity will come suddenly,
and who knows what bad end either set will come to?
23 These too are by the wise men. Favoritism in judging is not a good thing.
24 On one who says to a wrong-doer “You are in the right” Peoples will lay a curse, folk upon folk be hostile to him;
25 But those who call them to account shall be happy and upon them shall come a good blessing.
26 One who gives a square answer kisses lips.
27 Get your work in shape outdoors and have things ready in the field; afterward you may build your house.
28 Do not be a witness against your fellowman groundlessly and mislead people with your lips.
29 Do not say “I will do to him the same as he did to me,
I will pay the man back the like of his action.” 30 I went past an idle man’s field
and past a brainless man’s vineyard 31 And found it all grown up to nettles,
and weeds covered its surface and its stone wall was down. 32 And I viewed it and took it to heart,
saw and drew a lesson: 33 A little sleep, a little slumber,
a little folding your arms to lie abed 34 And your poverty shall come prowling and your want like a man under arms.
25 These too are proverbs of Solomon, which the men of King Hezekiah
of Judah compiled: 2 It is God’s glory to keep a matter veiled;
it is kings’ glory to investigate a matter. 3 Sky for height and earth for depth
and man’s heart inscrutable. 4 Dislodge dross from silver
and have a piece of ware come out for the silversmith; 5 Dislodge a rascal before a king
and have his throne stand firm in right. 6 Do not put on airs before a king
nor stand in the place for great men, 7 Because it is better to have him say to you “Come up here”
than to have him put you down before a nobleman. 8 Do not hurry to pass out by wholesale
what your eyes have seen,
Because what will you do in the sequel
when somebody humiliates you?
9 Fight your case against your opponent,
but do not betray another man’s secret, 10 For fear one who hears should brand you with disgrace
and you should never get your reputation back. 11 A word spoken to the point is golden apples in silver artwork.
12 A wise admonisher to a listening ear
is a gold earring and a nugget-gold pendant.
13 Like the coolness of snow in midsummer heat is a trusty courier to those who send him,
and he puts life back into his master. 14 A man who brags of a fictitious gift
is scud and wind and no shower. 15 By patience a chieftain is cajoled;
and a soft tongue breaks bones. 16 If you find honey, eat what is enough for you,
for fear you should be glutted and throw it up. 17 Make your foot a rarity in your neighbor’s house
for fear he should have enough of you and come to hate you. 18 A man who testifies falsely against another
is a mace and a sword and a barbed arrow. 19 One who is treacherous in a pinch
is a bad tooth and a shaky foot. 20 Vinegar on soda
and a singer of songs to a heavy heart.
Like a moth in a cloak and like rot of wood,
so grief eats away a man’s mind.
21 If your enemy is hungry feed him, and if he is thirsty give him a drink,
22 Because you will be shoveling live coals on his head, and Jehovah will repay you.
23 A north wind scares away a shower,
and hostile faces an underhand tongue.
24 Better living on the corner of a roof than a home shared with a quarrelsome woman.
25 Cold water on a palate exhausted with thirst and good news from a distant country.
26 An honest man compromising with a rogue
is a water-hole trampled up and a spring spoiled. 27 Eating honey in quantity is not a good thing,
and making grandeur a rarity is better than grandeur.
28 A man whose spirit does not have a control
is a broken city that does not have a wall.
26:1-28
26 As with snow in summer and with rain in harvest,
so importance is undesirable for a fool.
2 As with a sparrow in its wanderings, as with a swallow in its flight,
so with a groundless curse; it does not come in. 3 A whip for the pony, a bridle for the donkey,
4 Do not answer a fool on his own foolish basis
for fear you yourself should come to his level.
5 Answer a fool on his own foolish basis
for fear he should think he was wise.
6 One who sends an errand by a fool cuts off his own legs and drinks outrage.
7 A lame man’s legs
are thin and weak.
8 Like one who wraps up a stone in a piece of embroidery,
such is one who gives honor to a fool.
9 A brier gets into a drunken man’s hand and a proverb into fools’ mouths.
10 Fool and drunkard are more in number than sand; fool and drunkard are transient.
11 Like a dog going back to what it has vomited out
is a fool repeating his foolishness. 12 If you see a man who thinks he is wise,
there is more hope of a fool than of him. 13 An idler says “There is a panther on the road,
there is a lion between the squares.” 14 The door just turns on its hinges and an idler on his bed.
15 If an idler has stuck his hand into the dish
he is too tired for bringing it back to his mouth.
16 An idler thinks he is wiser than seven who can give an answer that makes sense.
17 A man mixing into a dispute that does not belong to him
is a man grabbing a passing dog by the tail. 18 Like an idiot throwing
firebrands, arrows, and death, 19 Such is a man who deceives another
and says “I was just joking, you know!” 20 Lacking wood, a fire goes out, and without a scandalmonger quarrels calm down.
21 Charcoal for a charcoal fire and wood for a wood fire, and a quarrelsome man to heat up a dispute.
22 A scandalmonger’s words are like the seeping of water,
and they run down into the deepest recesses of the body. 23 Glowing lips and a bad heart
are dross silver plated over earthenware. 24 A hater disguises himself with his lips,
but houses fraud within him; 25 When he makes his voice gracious do not trust him,
for he has seven abominations in his heart. 26 One who covers up hate with duplicity
will have his viciousness exposed in the assembly. 27 One who digs a pitfall will fall into it,
and one who rolls a stone will have it come back on him. 28 A false tongue hates its victims
and a smooth mouth knocks a man down.
27:1-27
27 Do not boast of tomorrow, because you do not know what a day will give birth to.
2 Let a stranger praise you and not your own mouth,
an alien and not your own lips. 3 A stone is heavy, and sand is a dead weight,
but the annoyance of a fool is heavier than either. 4 Ill temper is ruthless and anger is unsparing,
but who stands his ground before jealousy? 5 Better outspoken criticism
than unspoken love. 6 There is more trust to be put in bruises from one who loves than in effusive kisses from one who hates.
7 A glutted appetite will trample on virgin honey;
but to a hungry appetite everything bitter is sweet. 8 Like a bird strayed from its nest,
such is a man strayed from his place. 9 Oil and perfume cheer a heart, but it is torn up by anxiety of soul.
10 Do not leave your friend and your father’s friend,
a neighbor close by is better than a brother far away.
11 Be wise, son, and gladden my heart,
so that I may give an answer to the one who taunts me. 12 A sagacious man, seeing an evil, gets under cover;
13 Take his garment, because he went security for a stranger; foreclose him on a foreign woman’s account.
14 To the one who blesses his friend with a loud voice the first thing in the morning
it counts for a curse. 15 A dribbling leak in the roof in an all-day rain and a wrangling woman are the same sort of thing.
16 Whoever has smothered her down has smothered wind down,
and oil meets his hand. 17 Iron is polished on iron,
and a man polishes his friend’s behavior. 18 One who takes care of a fig-tree will eat its fruit,
and one who looks after his master will be honored. 19 As in water a face duplicates a face,
20 The realm of death and the limbo of the gone forever never get all they want,
and neither do man’s eyes. 21 Crucible for silver and furnace for gold, and a man according to what he prides himself on.
22 If you pound up a blockhead with a pestle
among the pemmican in a mortar his stupidity will not come off.
23 Know well how your sheep and goats are looking,
keep your mind on the flocks, 24 Because funds do not last forever
and no crown is for generation upon generation; 25 When grass is taken off and green stuff is showing
and mountain growths are brought in, 26 Sheep will be for your clothing
27 And there will be a good supply of goats’ milk for your food and a living for your girls. Proverbs
28:1-28 28 Wrong-doers run with nobody chasing them,
but an honest man is as fearless as a two-year-old lion.
2 By demoralization in a country dissensions are numerous,
but a sagacious man will extinguish them.
3 Aggrandizement of a chief and no rights for poor men
is a pounding rain and no crop.
4 Men who give up sound doctrine praise wrong-doers,
but men who are careful of sound doctrine oppose them.
5 Bad men have no insight into justice, but those who seek Jehovah have insight into everything.
6 Better a poor man leading a conscientious life
than a man of crooked courses, he being rich. 7 One who keeps sound doctrine is a sensible son,
but one who cultivates gormandizers humiliates his father.
8 One who increases his capital by interest and bonus
is gathering for one who will do favors for poor men.
9 If one takes his ear away from hearing sound doctrine
his very prayer is an abomination.
10 One who misleads upright men into a bad course
will himself fall into his pitfall, but conscientious men will come in for good.
11 A rich man thinks he is wise, but an intelligent poor man will see through him.
12 When honest men are celebrating a triumph
plenty of finery is on parade; But when rogues come to the top
people wear old clothes.
13 One who is covering up his offenses will not succeed; but one who acknowledges them and leaves them off will meet with clemency.
14 Happy a man who is always apprehensive;
but one who stiffens up his heart will fall into disaster.
15 An unscrupulous ruler over a poor people
is a growling lion and a ravenous bear.
16 A regent who is deficient in insight will be plentiful in injustices;
but one who hates jobbery will have a long life.
17 A man outlawed for bloodshed is to be a fugitive till he comes to the Pit; they are not to hold
him up. 18 One who walks conscientiously will be saved, but a man of crooked courses will fall into a pitfall.
19 One who works his ground will have plenty of bread;
but one who runs after unpractical things will have plenty of poverty.
20 A man of faithful dealing will have many blessings,
but one who is in a hurry to get rich will not be held innocent. 21 Favoritism is not a good thing,
and a man may offend on account of a bit of bread.
22 A stingy man is absorbed in property and does not know it is want that is coming to him.
23 One who reproves men will subsequently find more gratitude
than a smooth-tongued person.
24 One who steals from his father and mother
and says it is no crime is a mate for a ravager.
25 A man of excessive appetite starts quarrels,
but one who trusts in Jehovah will be given plenty of oil. 26 One who trusts to his own ideas is a fool,
but one who goes by wisdom will come off safe.
27 He who gives to the poor man has no shortage;
but he who ignores him has plenty of curses.
28 When rogues come to the top, people take cover;
but when they perish, honest men grow plentiful.
Proverbs
29:1-27
29 A man who keeps getting reproofs and stiffens his neck
will be incurably broken all at once.
2 When honest men are plentiful, the people makes merry;
but when a rogue rules, a people moans. 3 A man who loves wisdom gladdens his father,
but one who frequents prostitutes dissipates a property. 4 A king keeps a country standing by legality, but a levier of special taxes wrecks it.
5 A man who talks smoothly to another
is spreading a net for his feet. 6 In the crime of a bad man there is a trap,
while an honest man is jubilant and merry. 7 An honest man knows poor men’s claims;
a wrong-doer cannot see the point. 8 Men of cynical talk inflame a town,
but wise men turn anger backward.
9 A wise man has a case in court with an ignorant man and he gets excited and laughs and nobody gets any rest.
10 Cutthroats hate a steady man
and wrong-doers hunt for his life.
11 A fool lets out all his temper, but a wise man calms it by delay.
12 A ruler who is willing to listen to false talk
has rogues for all his ministers.
13 A poor man and an extortioner meet it is Jehovah who puts the light into the eyes of both.
14 A king who gives true judgment for poor men
shall have his throne firm forevermore.
15 Cudgel and reproof give wisdom;
but a boy running loose brings shame on his mother.
16 When wrong-doers are many, crimes are many;
but honest men will look on at their fall.
17 Discipline your son, and he will be a rest to you
and give you luxury.
18 Where there is no vision a people runs wild; but happy is one who keeps to sound doctrine.
19 A slave is not disciplined by talk;
when he does understand, there is no result. 20 If you see a man in a hurry to speak
there is more hope for a fool than for him. 21 One who pampers his slave from childhood
will have him turn out a troublemaker. 22 A peppery man starts quarrels,
and a hot-tempered man will have many misdeeds. 23 A man’s pride brings him low,
but one lowly of spirit will hold honor.
24 One who shares plunder with a thief hates his own life;
he will hear an imprecation and not tell.
25 Fearfulness of man lays a snare; but one who is confident in Jehovah is out of reach of harm.
26 Many seek a ruler’s presence,
but a man’s rights are from Jehovah.
27 A man of foul play is an abomination to honest people,
and one who takes a straightforward course is an abomination to
a rogue.
30:1-33
30 The words of Agur the son of Jakeh the Massaite.
Quoth the man, “I am tired, God,
tired, God, and used up,
2 Because I am more of a brute beast than of a man and have not human sense,
3 And have not learned wisdom
so as to have knowledge of the Holy.
4 Who has gone up to the sky and come down?
who has taken the wind in his two hands?
Who has taken up water in a blanket?
who set up all the extremities of the earth?
What is his name, and the name of his son?
since you know!
5 Every say of God’s is sterling;
he is a shield to those who take refuge in him. 6 Do not add to his words,
for fear he should arraign you and you turn out to have been lying. 7 I ask two things of you; do not refuse to let me have them before I die:
8 Keep shams and lying talk far away from me;
poverty and riches give not to me,
issue me my proper ration,
9 For fear I should have all I want and turn agnostic
and be irreverent to the name of my God. 10 Do not tell tales of a slave to his master,
for fear he should curse you and you bear the consequences.
11 A generation that curses its father and does not bless its mother!
12 A generation that thinks it is clean
and has not got the worst of its filth washed off! 13 A generation with eyes O how lofty and eyebrows raised!
14 A generation whose teeth are swords
and its fangs knives To eat unfortunate men off the earth and needy men out of the human race!”
15 The bloodsucker has two daughters: Give! Give! Three they are that never get their fill,
four that never say “enough”: 16 The realm of death, and barrenness of womb;
and fire, which never says “enough.” 17 An eye that gibes at a father and despises obedience to a mother Ravens of the glen will peck
and a vulture’s young will eat. 18 Three they are that are too mysterious for me
and four that I do not know about: 19 A vulture’s road in the sky, a snake’s road on a rock,
and a man’s road in a wench. 20 Such is an adulterous wife’s road:
she eats and wipes her mouth
and says “I did not do anything out of the way.”
21 Under three earth staggers, and under four it cannot bear up:
22 Under a slave when he gets to be king
and a boor when he gets his stomach full of bread,
23 Under an old maid when she gets married
and a slave-girl when she gets into her mistress’s place.
24 Four they are that are earth’s little things
but are shrewdly wise:
25 The ants are a people that are not strong, but they make their preparations in summer for their bread;
26 Dassies are a people that are not formidable, but they place their house in the crag;
27 The grasshoppers have no king, but they all go out on an aimed course;
28 A lizard you can catch in your hands, but it is in royal palaces.
29 Three they are that are fine of step and four that are fine of walk:
30 A lion, champion among beasts, that does not turn back for any;
31 A strutting cock; or a he-goat; and a king
do not stand up against him.
32 If you are adrift when you fly high or if you have a design
hand on mouth! 33 For bumping milk brings out butter,
and bumping a nose brings out blood, and bumping anger brings out discord.
Proverbs
31:1-31
31 The words of King Lemuel of Massa, in which his mother instructed him.
2 What, my son? and what, son of my body?
and what, son of my vows?
3 Do not give your vigor to women
nor your courses to those who undo kings.
4 Be it not for kings, Lemuel,
not for kings to drink wine
nor for potentates to crave beer,
5 For fear one should drink and forget legality and unsettle justice in the case of any of the downtrodden.
6 Give beer to a ruined man
and wine to men with sore hearts;
7 Let one drink and forget his poverty
and no longer remember his trouble.
8 Open your mouth for a voiceless man, to give justice in the case of any who have no firm footing in life;
9 Open your mouth, judge fairly,
and give verdicts for an unfortunate and a needy man. 10 O to find an efficient wife!
her value is beyond that of coral. 11 Her husband’s heart rests confident in her,
and he has no lack of winnings. 12 She does him good and never harm
all her life long. 13 She looks up wool and flax,
and works with willing hands. 14 She is like a trader’s ships, brings her bread from far away.
15 And she rises while it is still night
and gives provisions to her household
and a ration to her girls.
16 She plans for a field and gets it;
out of the fruit of her hands she plants a vineyard.
17 She belts her waist with strength
and puts energy into her arms.
18 She perceives that her business is good
her lamp does not go out in the night. 19 She reaches her arms to the distaff
and her hands work the spindle. 20 She opens her hands to the unfortunate man
and reaches them out to the needy one.
21 She is not afraid of snow for her household
because her household is all wearing scarlet. 22 She makes herself sleeping-rugs;
her dress is lawn and purple.
23 Her husband is a marked man in the gates
when he sits with the elders of the country.
24 She makes a cambric wrapper and sells it
and gives a belt to the merchant.
25 Strength and stateliness are her dress,
and she laughs at a future day.
26 She opens her mouth with wisdom
and has friendly instructions on her tongue
27 As she watches the goings-on of her house
and does not eat in idleness.
28 Her sons stand up and felicitate her;
her husband, and praises her: 29 “Many have been the daughters that made notable records,
but you overtop them all.” 30 Charm is a cheat and beauty is a bubble;
a woman who fears Jehovah is the one to praise.
31 Give her fruits of her own hands
and let her own work praise her in the gates.
Ecclesiastes
1:1-18
1 The words of Koheleth the son of David, king in Jerusalem.
2 Perfect nonsense, says Koheleth
perfect nonsense
everything is nonsense.
3 How much is man better off by all the trouble he takes under the sun? 4 A generation goes and a generation comes, and the earth stands forever.
5 And the sun rises and the sun sets and bustles to its place where it rises.
6 The wind goes off to the south and round to the north, goes clear round, and the wind goes to going round again.
7 All the rivers go to the sea and the sea is not full; to the place the rivers go to they go over again.
8 All things work hard; a man cannot tell it out; an eye does not do all the seeing it will nor an ear get full with, hearing.
9 What was, that will be; and what has been done, that will be done; and there is not anything new under the sun.
10 Is there a thing of which one says “See this, it is new”
it has already been in the ages that there were before ours.
11 There is no remembrance of the past; and also of the future that is to be there will be no remembrance among those who shall be subsequently.
12 I Koheleth was king over Israel in Jerusalem, 13 and gave my mind to examining and exploring scientifically as to everything that is done under the skies
that is a bad employment God has given to mankind to employ themselves at.
14 I saw all the doings that go on under the sun, and found it was all nonsense and chasing after wind: 15 a crooked thing cannot be set straight and a deficit cannot be counted in.
2:1-26 2 I said to myself “Come on, I will try you with merrymaking; have a good time!” and found that too was nonsense.
2 I said of laughter “crazy” and of merrymaking “What does this accomplish?” 3 I thought up the idea of drawing my flesh on with wine while my mind kept the course with wisdom, taking a grip on foolery till I should see which thing is good for mankind to do under the skies such time as they live.
4 I made my works great: I built myself houses, planted myself vineyards, 5 made myself gardens and parks and planted all sorts of fruit trees in them, 6 made myself reservoirs of water to water groves and shrubberies out of, 7 bought slaves and raised slaves, also had more livestock, cattle and sheep and goats, than anybody that had been before me in Jerusalem, 8 amassed myself silver and gold too and the rarities of kings and provinces, got myself singers of both sexes and mankind’s voluptuous delights, many a lady.
9 And I grew great and surpassed anybody that had been before me in Jerusalem; my wisdom too stood by me.
10 And nothing that my eyes asked for did I cut off from them; I did not check my heart from any enjoyments, but my heart got enjoyment out of all my trouble, and this was the portion I had from all my trouble.
11 And I faced all my works that my hands had made and all the trouble that I had taken in the making, and found it was all nonsense and chasing after wind, and nobody was better off under the sun.
12 And I faced round to see wisdom and craziness and foolery
because what is the man who comes after the king to do? what has been done already
13 and I saw that wisdom has as much advantage over foolery as light has over darkness; 14 the wise man has his eyes in his head, and the fool walks in the dark.
But I had also learned that one fate befalls them all.
15 And I thought to myself “A fate like the fool’s will befall me also, and then what was I wiser for?” and I said to myself that this too was nonsense, 16 for the wise man with the fool has no remembrance forever, inasmuch as in the coming days everything will already have been forgotten; and how the wise man has to die with the fool! 17 and I hated life, because I felt the work that is done under the sun to be a bad thing because everything is nonsense and chasing after wind.
18 And I hated everything I had taken so much trouble about under the sun, seeing I was to leave it to the man who should be after me
19 and who knows whether he will be wise or foolish? but he will control everything I have taken so much trouble about and been so wise about under the sun
this is nonsense too; 20 and I swung round to lose interest in everything I had taken so much trouble about under the sun.
21 For there is a man whose trouble is taken with wisdom and knowledge and judgment, and he is to give it over to be the portion of a man that took no trouble about it
this too is nonsense, and a very bad thing.
22 For what does a man have by all his trouble and his purposes that he takes trouble for under the sun, 23 that all his life he is taken up with pain and vexation, his heart does not even lie quiet at night? this too is nonsense.
24 There is nothing better among men than that one should eat and drink and let himself see good by his trouble.
This too I have seen to be from God’s hand; 25 for who should eat or find flavor in anything without him? 26 For to the man who is good from his point of view he gives wisdom and knowledge and gladness, but to the sinner he gives a task of collecting and amassing to give to one who is good from God’s point of view this too is nonsense and chasing after wind.
Ecclesiastes
3:1-22
3 There is a season of everything, and a time of every concern under the heavens: 2 a time of being born and a time of dying, a time of planting and a time of grubbing out what was planted, 3 a time of killing and a time of healing, a time of wrecking and a time of building, 4 a time of weeping and a time of laughing, a time of wailing and a time of dancing, 5 a time of throwing stones about and a time of gathering up stones, a time of embracing and a time of shunning embraces,
6 a time of hunting up and a time of losing, a time of keeping and a time of throwing away, 7 a time of tearing and a time of sewing, a time of keeping silence and a time of speaking, 8 a time of loving and a time of hating, a time of war and a time of peace.
9 How much is the doer better off by his trouble? 10 I have seen the employment God has given to mankind to employ themselves at: 11 he has made everything fine at its time, he has even put eternity into their minds except that man does not find out the work God has done from beginning to end; 12 I have learned that there is nothing good among them but to enjoy one’s self and get on well while one is alive.
13 And besides, when any man does eat and drink and see good by all his trouble it is God’s gift.
14 I have learned that everything that God makes will be so forever; there is no adding to it nor subtracting from it; and God makes them fear before him.
15 Whatever is, already was; and what shall be, already is; and God hunts up antiquated things.
16 And furthermore I saw under the sun, in the place for judgment, wrong there; and in the place for the right-doer, the wrong-doer there.
19 because mankind are an accident and cattle are an accident, and they have one fate: as this one dies, so does that one, and everything has one spirit, and man has no superiority over cattle because everything is nonsense.
4:1-16
4 And I came back to seeing all the denials of justice that are committed under the sun: there were the tears of the oppressed and no comforter for them, and on the part of their oppressors power and no comforter for them;
2 and I congratulated the dead who have already died rather than the living who are still alive, 3 and, better than either of them, him who has not yet existed, who has not seen the bad work that is done under the sun.
4 And I saw all taking of trouble and all efficiency in work to be rivalry between man and man; this too is nonsense and chasing after wind.
5 The fool folds his arms and eats his own flesh.
6 Better a handful of rest than a double handful of trouble and chasing after wind.
7 And I came back to seeing a piece of nonsense under the sun:
8 there is one man and no second one, he has neither son nor brother; and there is no end to all the trouble he takes, nor do his eyes get their fill of riches, and for whom am I taking the trouble and depriving myself of good things? this too is nonsense and a bad business.
9 Better two than one, because when they take trouble they get good pay.
10 For if they fall, one will help his comrade to his feet; but woe to a single man who falls and has no second to help him up!
11 Also, if two are lying in bed they will be warm, but how is just one to be warm?
12 And if somebody would overpower the single man, the two will stand up to him. And a three-stranded cord is not quickly to be broken.
13 Better a destitute but wise lad than an old and foolish king who no longer knows enough to take warning,
14 because out of prison he came out to become king when in his very kingdom he had been born poor.
15 I saw all the living, those who walk about under the sun, with the lad, the second, who was to stand in his place.
16 There was no end of all the people, all at whose head he was; but neither were those who came after to be glad of him, because this too was nonsense and chasing after wind.
5:1-20
5 Mind your step when you go to God’s house: coming near to hear is better than fools’ giving a sacrifice, because they do not know how to do anything but what is bad.
2 Do not get your mouth into a rush, and let your heart not be quick about bringing out a word before God; for God is in heaven and you on earth; therefore let your words be few.
3 For a dream comes with a great deal of business, and a fool’s voice with a great deal of talk.
4 When you make a vow to God do not be backward about paying it off, because fools are not liked; pay what you vowed; 5 better that you should not vow than that you should vow and not pay.
6 Do not permit your mouth to bring your flesh into sin, and do not say before the angel that it was unintentional; why should God be incensed at your voice and ruin the work of your hands? 7 For with many dreams and nonsenses there is much talk; but fear God.
8 If in the province you see disregard of a poor man’s claims and usurpation against law and right, do not be shocked at the affair, because above a high man a higher man is on the watch, and higher men above them.
9 But it is to a country’s advantage, for all that, that a cultivated region should have a king.
10 One who loves money will not get his fill of money; nor whoever loves affluence, of income; this too is nonsense: 11 when there is much good cheer there are many eaters of it, and what result does its owner have except the looking on? 12 The worker’s sleep is sweet whether he eats little or much, but fullness for a rich man does not give him a chance to go to sleep.
13 There is a galling evil I have seen under the sun
riches watched over by their owner to his own harm, 14 and those riches are lost in some bad affair, and he has a son born, and he has nothing in his hands; 15 as he came out of his mother’s body, naked he goes back, going as he came, and does not pick up by his trouble anything that he can take along in his hand.
16 And this too is a galling evil: just the way he came, so he goes, and how much is he better off for putting himself to trouble just for wind? 17 and all his life is spent in darkness and mourning and many annoyances and diseases and exasperations.
Here is the way I see it: 18 it is best that one should turn his attention to eating and drinking and seeing good by all his trouble that he takes under the sun in such time for living as God has given him, because that is his portion.
19 Also, when God has given any man riches and substance and the privilege of eating from it and of taking up his portion and of enjoying himself for his trouble, this is God’s gift, 20 for he will not much remember the days he has lived through because God busies him with his heart’s enjoyment.
Ecclesiastes 6:1-12
6 There is an evil I have seen under the sun, and man has upon him a great deal of it: 2 a man to whom God gives riches and substance and honors, and he has no shortage of anything his appetites crave, and God does not give him the privilege of eating from it but some alien eats it; this is nonsense and a grievous disorder.
this has a more restful state than that man.
6 And if one lives a thousand years twice over and does not see good, does not everything go to one place? 7 All man’s trouble is for his mouth, and yet the appetite is not filled.
8 For how much better off is the wise man than the fool? how much the humble man who knows how to walk before the living? 9 Better seeing with eyes than rambling of desires.
This too is nonsense and chasing after wind.
10 What is is already named and known to be man, and he cannot contest against him who is more potent than he.
11 For there are many words that increase nonsense; what advance does man make? 12 For who knows what is good for man in life, as many as are his days of nonsensical life which he passes through like a shadow? for who is to tell man what is to be after him under the sun?
Ecclesiastes
7:1-29
7 A name is better than choice oil; and the day of death than that of one’s birth.
2 Better to go to the house of mourning than to the house of banqueting, inasmuch as that is the end of all humanity, and the living man will take it to heart.
3 Better gloominess than laughter, because by grimness in the face the mind is in good spirits.
4 Wise men’s hearts are in a house of mourning, but fools’ hearts are in a house of merrymaking.
5 Better to listen to a wise man’s rebuke than anybody’s listening to the singing of fools.
6 For like the sound of fires of briers, such is fools’ laughter.
7 And this too is nonsense, that denial of justice maddens a wise man and ruins sensible men’s brains.
8 Better the future of a thing than its past; better a patient spirit than a pretentious spirit.
9 Do not rush into getting your spirit vexed, because vexation rests in fools’ bosoms.
10 Do not say “What has happened, that past times were better than these?” for it is not out of wisdom that you ask about this.
11 Wisdom with an inheritance is a good thing, and to the advantage of those who see the sun.
12 For the shade of money is like the shade of wisdom, but the advantage of knowledge is, wisdom gives life to its possessors.
13 See God’s work; for who is able to set straight what he crooks?
14 On a day of good be in a good mood, and on a day of evil see: God made this too to go with that, with a view to man’s not finding out anything that is to follow.
15 I have seen everything happen in my days of nonsense.
There is such a thing as a right-doer perishing in his right-doing, and there is such a thing as a wrong-doer getting a long life in his wrong-doing.
16 Do not be an extreme right-doer and do not go in excessively for wisdom: why turn anchorite? 17 Do not go to extremes in doing wrong, and do not be foolish: why die before your time? 18 Better hold on to this and not let go of that, because one who fears God will get through with all of it.
19
Wisdom is stronger for the wise man than any ten autocrats that there have been in the city.
20 For there is no human saint on earth that does what is good and never sins.
21 Do not take notice, either, of all words that are spoken, that you may not hear your slave curse you; 22 for you know yourself that many times you yourself have cursed others.
23 All this I probed by wisdom.
I thought I would be wise; but that was too far off for me.
24 What is is far off and deep, deep; who is to find it out?
25 I have gone about, my heart and I, to know and to explore and search out wisdom and science, and to know wrong to be folly, and fooling to be craziness.
26 And I find a bitterer thing than death: woman, whose heart is toils and nets and whose arms are fetters; one whom God finds good will get clear of her, but a sinner will be caught on her.
27 See, this I have found, says Koheleth, putting one thing with another to get a result, 28 that my soul still searched and I did not find.
One out of a thousand of mankind I found, but a woman among all these I never did find.
29 This alone, see, I did find: that God made man straight, but they have hunted out many contrivances.
Ecclesiastes 8:1-17
8 Who is like the wise man? and who knows the explanation of a thing?
A man’s wisdom puts light into his face, and the hardness of his face is changed.
For he does anything he chooses to, 4 inasmuch as a king’s word is authoritative, and who will say to him “What are you doing?”
9 All this I saw, keeping my mind on all the work that was done under the sun, at a time when man had control of man to his own harm.
10 And then I saw wrong-doers buried, and coming in, out of a holy place, and their bad record forgotten in the city.
This too is nonsense, 11 that sentence on evil-doing is not quickly executed; therefore the hearts of mankind are altogether determined to do evil, 12 inasmuch as a sinner does evil all along and has a long life
though I do know that for those who fear God there will be good inasmuch as they stand in fear before him, 13 but for the wrong-doer there will not be good and he will have no long life, like a shadow, inasmuch as he does not stand in fear before God.
14 There is a piece of nonsense that is done on earth, that there are right-doers to whom there happens what is suitable to wrong-doers’ work and there are wrong-doers to whom there happens what is suitable to right-doers’ work. I say this is nonsense too.
15 And I praise merrymaking, inasmuch as there is nothing good for man under the sun but to eat and drink and make merry, and he will have that to go with him for his trouble through his time of life which God has given to him under the sun.
16 When I applied my heart to knowing wisdom and seeing all the business that is done on earth
for day and night it does not get even a glimpse of sleep
17 I saw all God’s work, how man cannot make out all the work that is done under the sun, inasmuch as man puts himself to trouble looking into it but does not make it out, and even if the wise man professes to know he cannot make it out.
9:1-18
9 For I took all this into my heart, and my heart saw all this, that the righteous and the wise and their doings are in God’s hands: neither love nor hate does man know about.
2 Everything that has gone before them is nonsense, as there is one fate for all, for the right-doer and the wrong-doer, and for the clean and the unclean, and for the sacrificer and the nonsacrificer; the good man is like the sinner, the swearer like him who is afraid of swearing.
3 This is a bad thing in all that is done under the sun, that there is one fate for all; and also the hearts of mankind are full of evil, and they have craziness in their hearts through their lives; and afterward, to the dead, 4 for who is there that has a choice As to all the living there is something to depend on; for a living dog is thereby better than the dead lion.
5 For the living know they are to die, but the dead do not know a thing, and no longer get any reward, because the memory of them is forgotten.
6 Both their love and their hate and their ardors are lost in the past, and they no longer have a part, forever not, in anything that is done under the sun.
7 Go, eat your bread in merriment and drink your wine with happy heart, because God has already given his approval to your doings.
8 At every time be your clothes white and oil not scanty on your head.
9 Gaze on life with a wife you love, all the days of your nonsensical life that God has given to you under the sun; all the days of your nonsense, because that is the portion you get by living and by your trouble that you take under the sun.
10 Everything that comes within your reach to do with your powers, do; because there is no action nor purpose nor knowledge nor wisdom in the world below, where you are going.
11 I came back seeing under the sun that the race does not go to the swift nor the battle to the crack fighters, neither does bread go to the wise, neither do riches go to the longheaded, neither does popularity go to the knowing, because time and chance happen to all of them.
12 For man does not know his time either: like the fishes, that are gripped by a disastrous net, or like the birds, that are gripped by the trap, like them mankind are trapped in a disastrous time when it falls upon them suddenly.
13 This too I saw of wisdom under the sun, and it was great to me: 14 a small city, and few men in it, and there came to it a great king and surrounded it and built great towers against it; 15 but he found in it a wise poor man, and he preserved the city by his wisdom; but people did not remember that poor man.
16 And I say, wisdom is better than prowess, but the poor man’s wisdom is despised and his words are not listened to.
17 Wise men’s words in quiet are heard better than the screams of a ruler among fools.
18 Wisdom is better than weapons of battle.
But one bungler brings the loss of a great deal of good.
10:1-20
10 Dead flies taint perfumer’s oil with foul-smelling bubbles; a little foolishness outweighs wisdom and standing.
2 A wise man’s heart is toward his right, but a fool’s heart toward his left.
3 And even on the road as the foolish man is walking his brains give out and he tells everybody he is foolish.
4 If the ruler’s temper rises against you, do not leave your position; for coolness quiets down great faults.
5 There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, seeming like a blunder that originates among the autocrat’s officers: 6 foolishness is put in many lofty positions and rich men sit in low places; 7 I have seen slaves on horseback and chieftains walking on the ground like slaves.
8 He who digs a pit falls into it, and he who breaks down a wall has, a snake bite him; 9 he who takes out stones gets hurt by them; he who splits wood is in danger by it.
10 If the iron has grown dull and he has not whetted, then he exerts himself; but wisdom is an advantage for giving efficiency.
11 If the snake bites without having been charmed, one is no better off for having a skilled tongue.
12 The words of a wise man’s mouth are ingratiating, but a fool’s lips swamp him.
13 The first words of his mouth are foolishness and the last of it is a bad case of craziness; 14 and the foolish fellow makes a lot of talk.
Man does not know what will happen, and who is to tell him what is to come after him? 15 The fool’s trouble tires him out, as he does not know enough to walk to town.
16 Alas for you, country whose king is a boy and whose generals eat in the morning! 17 Happy are you, country whose king is a son of nobles and whose generals eat at a regular hour, for strength and not for drinking! 18 By indolence the timbers sag, and by unlifted hands the roof leaks.
19 They get up meals for fun, and wine makes life merry, and money provides an answer for everything.
20 Do not misspeak a king even mentally, nor a rich man in your bedchambers, for the birds of the air will convey the sound and the winged will carry word.
11:1-10
11 Let your bread go out over the water, for in the long run you will find it.
2 Give share to seven and even to eight, because you do not know what there will be of disaster on the earth.
3 If the clouds get full of a shower they empty it out on the earth; and if a tree falls toward the south, or if toward the north, in the place where the tree falls, there it will be.
4 One who watches the wind will not sow, and one who views the clouds will not reap.
5 As you do not know what is the course of the spirit into bones in the body of the pregnant woman, so you will not know the working of God who works everything.
6 In the morning sow your seed and at evening do not rest your hand, because you do not know which will do right, whether this or that or both of them alike will be good.
7 And the light is sweet, and it does the eyes good to see the sun; 8 for if man lives many years he is to be merry in all of them.
8 Perfect nonsense, says Koheleth; everything is nonsense.
9 And in addition to Koheleth’s being a wise man he taught knowledge to the people besides, and, weighing and probing, edited many proverbs.
10 Koheleth aimed to find interesting language and write straightforward truths.
11 Wise men’s words are like goad-points, and such as are taken up into collections are like driven nails; they are given from one shepherd.
12 And in addition to these things, my son, take warning: of making many books there is no end, and studying much is a fatigue to the flesh.
13 Last word; all is heard: fear God and keep his commandments, for this is the whole of man.
14 For God will bring every action under a judgment covering every unknown circumstance, be it good or be it bad.
Song of Solomon
1:1-17
1 Solomon’s Song of Songs
2 Let him give me kisses from his mouth, for your love is better than wine.
3 Your oils are good to smell; your name is Turak oil; therefore the girls love you.
4 Draw me after you; we will run;bring me into your chambers, king! We will be gay and glad in you;
we think more of your love than of wine; rightly they love you.
5 I am dark but handsome, daughters of Jerusalem, like Kedar’s tents, like Solomon’s curtains.
6 Do not notice how dark I am, how the sun has taken a look at me; My mother’s sons were cross with me, set me to watch the vineyards; my own vineyard I did not watch.
7 Tell me, you whom my soul loves, where you are pasturing your flock, where you are having them lie down at noon; Why should I be like a girl wandering at random by your comrades’ flocks?
8 If you do not know, most beautiful among women, Go out on the track of the sheep and pasture your kids by the shepherds’ tents.
9 To a pony in the Pharaoh’s chariots I liken you, sweetheart.
10 How handsome your cheeks with face-chains, your neck with beads!
11 We will make you gold face-chains with silver studs.
12 While the king was at his table my nard gave its scent. 13 My truelove is to me the package of myrrh lying between my breasts through the night.
14 My truelove is to me a cluster of henna-flowers in the vineyards of ʽEn-Gedi.
15 Ah, you are beautiful, sweetheart, ah, you are beautiful, your eyes are doves.
16 Ah, you are beautiful, truelove, winsome too; our couch too is verdant.
17 The beams of our house are cedars, our rafters are cypresses.
2:1-17
2 I am a narcissus on the plain, a lily in one of the vales.
2 Like a lily among the briers, such is my sweetheart among the daughters.
3 Like an apple-tree among the trees on the rocks, such is my truelove among the sons.
I am eager to sit in his shade and his fruit is sweet to my palate.
4 He has brought me to the winehouse, and his banner over me is love.
5 Refresh me with raisins, recover me with apples, because I am breaking down with love.
6 His left arm clasps my head and his right embraces me.
7 I adjure you, daughters of Jerusalem, by the gazelles or the wild does, Not to wake love or rouse it up till it so please.
8 My truelove’s step! here he comes Leaping along the mountains, bounding along the hills;
9 My truelove seems like a gazelle or a young deer.
Here he is standing outside the wall of our house, Gazing through the windows, glancing through the lattices.
10 My truelove speaks up and says to me “Up, sweetheart; come on, my beauty,
11 For the winter is over, the rains are past and gone,
12 The flowers on the ground are out, song-time has come in and the turtledove’s note is heard in our country;
13 The fig-tree has its fruit-buds out and the blooming grapevines are fragrant.
Up, sweetheart; come on, my beauty. 14 My dove in the crannies of the cliff, in the covert of the rock-ledge, Let me see your form, let me hear your voice, Because your voice is sweet and your form is lovely.”
15 “Catch foxes!
Little foxes are damaging vineyards, and our vineyards are blooming!”
16 My truelove is mine and I am his, who pastures his flock among the lilies
17 Till the day grows breezy and the shadows take flight.
Truelove, come round and do like a gazelle Or a young deer on the mountains of Bether.
Song of Solomon
3:1-11
3 On my bed of nights I looked for the one that my soul loves, looked for him and did not find him.
2 Let me stand up and go round in the city in the streets and the squares Looking for the one that my soul loves; I looked for him and did not find him.
3 The watchmen that go round in the city found me: “Have you seen the one that my soul loves?”
4 I had got a little past them when I found the one that my soul loves.
I caught hold of him, did not let go of him Till I brought him to my mother’s house, to my parent’s chamber. 5 I adjure you, daughters of Jerusalem, by the gazelles or the wild does, Not to wake love or rouse it up till it so please.
6 Who is this coming up out of the wilderness like columns of smoke, Perfumed with burnings of myrrh and frankincense,with every powder money can buy? 7 Here comes Solomon’s bed, Sixty champions round it, champions of Israel,
8 All of them sword-wielders, men trained to war, Each with sword on thigh against night alarms.
9 King Solomon has made himself a palanquin of wood from the Lebanon,
10 Made its legs of silver,its back of gold, Its seat of purple, its body inlaid with ebony.
11 Daughters of Jerusalem, go out and gaze at King Solomon In the wreath his mother put on him on his wedding-day, the day of his heart’s gladness.
Song of Solomon 4:1-16
4 Ah, you are beautiful, sweetheart, ah, you are beautiful.
Your eyes are doves behind your veil.
Your hair is like a flock of goats that overflow a Gilead mountain.
2 Your teeth are like the flock for clipping as they come up from the washing, Flock where they all have twins and not one has lost a lamb.
3 Your lips are like scarlet thread and your mouth is lovely.
Your temple is like a segment of pomegranate behind your veil.
4 Your neck is like David’s tower built for an armory, With the thousand shields hung on it, all the bucklers of the champions.
5 Your two breasts are like two fawns, a gazelle’s twins That pasture among the lilies
6 till the day grows breezy and the shadows take flight. I wend my way to the mountain of myrrh and to the hill of frankincense.
7 You are beautiful all of you, sweetheart, and there is nothing wrong about you.
8 With me from Lebanon, bride, with me from Lebanon you shall come, You shall look off from the top of Amana, from the tops of Shenir and Hermon, From lions’ haunts, from leopards’ mountains.
9 You have driven me out of my senses, my sister, bride; you have driven me out of my senses with one of your eyes, with one bead of your necklace.
10 How pretty is your love, my sister, bride! how much better than wine is your love, and the scent of your oils than all spices!
11 Your lips drip purest honey, bride; you have honey and milk under your tongue, and the scent of your clothes is like that of Lebanon.
12 A locked garden is my sister, bride, a locked garden, a sealed water-spring.
13 Your sprays are an orchard of pomegranates and priceless fruits, plants of henna and nard,
14 Nard and saffron, sweet flag and cinnamon, with all frankincense-bearing trees, Myrrh and eaglewood with all rarest spices.
15 The spring in my garden is a well of living water and a flow from Lebanon.
16 Wake, north wind, and come, south, blow through my garden, let its spices flow.
Let my truelove come into his garden and eat its priceless fruits.
Song of Solomon
5:1-16
5 I come into my garden, my sister, bride, gather my myrrh with my balsam, Eat my honeycomb with my honey, drink my wine with my milk.
Eat, friend, drink and carouse, truelove! 2 I was asleep but my heart was awake: the sound of my truelove knocking!
“Open to me, my sister, my sweetheart, my dove, my ideal, Because my head has got full of dew, my locks of night drops.” 3 “I have taken off my tunic; how can I put it on?
4 My truelove put his hand through the hole and my bosom was in a turmoil over him.
5 I stood up to open for my truelove, and my hands were dripping with myrrh And my fingers with myrrh that went over to the handles of the bolt.
6 I did open for my truelove, but my truelove had turned round and gone. The life had gone out of me at his speaking; I looked for him and did not find him, called him and he did not answer me.
7 The guards that go round in the city found me, beat me, wounded me; The guards of the walls took my mantle off me.
8 I adjure you, daughters of Jerusalem, if you find my truelove, To what you are to tell him: that I am breaking down with love.
9 “What sort of truelove is yours, most beautiful among women?
What sort of truelove is yours, that you adjure us like that?” 10 My truelove is white and red, outstanding among ten thousand.
11 His head is nuggets of red gold; his locks are waving, black as a raven.
12 His eyes are like doves by dingles of water, bathed in milk and laid in settings.
13 His cheeks are like beds of sweet herbs growing perfumers’ stock; His lips are lilies that drip flowing myrrh.
14 His arms are cylinders of gold set with jasper; His waist is a block of ivory overspread with sapphires.
15 His legs are pillars of marble resting on bases of red gold. The look of him is like the Lebanon, admirable as the cedars.
16 His talk is luscious and everything about him fascinating.
This is my truelove and this is my friend, daughters of Jerusalem.
6:1-13
6 “Which way did your truelove go, most beautiful among women?
Which way did your truelove turn? and we will look for him with you.” 2 My truelove went down to his garden, to the beds of sweet herbs, To crop the gardens and pick lilies.
3 I am my truelove’s and my truelove is mine, who pastures his flock among lilies.
4 You are beautiful, sweetheart, as Tirsah, lovely as Jerusalem, terrible as the aurora.
5 Turn your eyes off me, for they overpower me. Your hair is like a flock of goats that overflow Gilead.
6 Your teeth are like a flock of ewes as they come up from the washing, Flock where they all have twins and not one has lost a lamb.
7 Your temple is like a segment of pomegranate behind your veil.
8 Sixty are queens and eighty concubines, and maids innumerable;
9 One is my dove, my ideal,her mother’s one is she,her parent’s pure one she.Girls saw her and felicitated her,queens and concubines, and praised her.
10 Who is this that looks out like dawn, beautiful as the moon, clear as the sun,terrible as the aurora?
11 I went down to the nut-garden to look over the things starting in the arroyo, To see if the grapevines had broken out their buds,if the pomegranates had blossomed.
12 I did not know;my soul had made me ʽAmmi-Nadib’s chariots.
13 7:1 Come back, come back, Shulammite;come back, come back, and let us have a look at you.What sight of the Shulammite would you have?
In the camp dance!
7:1-13
7 7:2 How beautifully your feet tap with the shoes, daughter of a nobleman!
The swing of your hips is like bangles made by an artist’s hands.
2 7:3 Your navel is like a stirring-bowl may there be no lack of wine-mixture!Your waist is like a heap of wheat set round with lilies.
3 7:4 Your two breasts are like two fawns, a gazelle’s twins.
4 7:5 Your neck is like the Ivory Tower.
Your eyes are like the reservoirs at Heshbon at the Bath-Rabbim gate. Your nose is like the Lebanon tower looking out on the Damascus side.
5 7:6 Your head stands on you like Carmel, and the strands of your head are like purple; a king is fettered in the threads.
6 7:7 How beautiful you are, how winsome, love, daughter of delight!
7 7:8 This figure of yours is the likeness of a palm tree; and your breasts, of clusters.
8 7:9 I think I will climb the palm tree, take hold of its bunches of fruit, And let your breasts be like clusters of the grapevine and the scent of your breath like that of apples,
9 7:10 And your mouth like the best wine, running smoothly for my throat, gliding through my lips and teeth.
10 7:11 I am my truelove’s and his impulse is toward me.
11 7:12 Come on, truelove, we will go out on the range, pass the night in the villages,
12 7:13 Be in the vineyards the first thing in the morning seeing if the grapevines have broken out their buds, Have come into bloom, if the pomegranates have blossomed.
There I will give you my love. 13 7:14 The mandrake-apples are giving their scent, and at our doors are all sorts of fine fruits; New and last year’s too, truelove, I have laid up for you.
8:1-14
8 If only you were the same as a brother of mine, one that had sucked my mother’s breasts!
Finding you in the street, I would kiss you; they would not despise me either. 2 I would lead you, would bring you to my mother’s house, to the chamber of her who gave me birth.
I would give you a drink of perfumed wine, of my pomegranate-wine. 3 His left arm clasps my head and his right embraces me.
4 I adjure you, daughters of Jerusalem, why should you wake love or rouse it up till it so please?
5 Who is this coming up from the wilderness leaning on her truelove?
Under the apple-tree I waked you up; it was there your mother bore the birth-pains for you, there she bore the birth-pains, brought you to birth.
6 Lay me like a seal over your heart, like a seal on your arm; For love is violent as death, jealousy hard as the grave; Its flashes are flashes of fire, Jehovah’s flame-throwing.
7 Much water cannot quench love, and rivers will not sweep it away; If a man were to give all the goods in his house for love they would just despise him.
8 “We have a little sister and she has no breasts; what shall we do for our sister on the day when she is to be spoken for?
9 If she is a wall we will build silver battlements on her, but if she is a door we will board her up with cedar planks.”
10 I am a wall and my breasts are like the towers; then I was in his eyes like one who finds peace.
11 Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-Hamon; he gave the vineyard to keepers, each to bring in a thousand shekels of silver.
12 I have my own vineyard before me; the thousand for you, Solomon, and two hundred for those who keep its fruit safe!
13 You that are sitting in the garden, comrades are listening for your voice; let me hear it.
14 Off with you, truelove, and do like a gazelle Or a young deer on the spice mountains.
Lamentations
1:1-22
1 How lonely she sits, the city great in people! she has become like a widow, the great among the nations.
Princess among the provinces, she has come to serfdom. 2 She is weeping in the night, has tears on her cheeks; there is not a comforter for her out of all her lovers, all her friends have played her false, become enemies to her.
3 Judah has gone to an expatriate life because of destitution and overwork; she has settled among the nations but not found a resting-place; everybody who was hunting her down has come upon her in a tight place.
4 The roads to Sion are mourning not to have people coming in to the holy dates; all her gates are desolate, her priests are moaning, her maidens are sorrowing, and she is in bitter grief.
5 Her foes are in control, her enemies are untroubled, because Jehovah has reduced her to misery for her multitude of crimes. The children in her have gone into foreign slavery before the foe.
6 And all the stateliness of the daughter of Sion has gone out of her, her generals have become like deer that find no pasture and have gone along strengthless before a pursuer.
7 Jerusalem remembers her days of misery and homelessness when her people were falling by a foeman’s hand and she had no helper; foemen saw her, laughed over her extinction.
8 Jerusalem did sin, so she has become a piece of garbage; all who had been honoring her hold her cheap because they have seen her nakedness; she too moans and retreats backward.
9 She has her defilement on her skirts; she did not bethink herself of her future. She has come down extraordinarily; there is nobody to comfort her.
10 A foe has spread his hand over all she held dear; for she has seen heathens come into her sanctuary, of whom you commanded “you shall not have them come into the assembly.”
11 All her people are moaning, hunting for bread, have given what they held dearest for food to bring back life. See, Jehovah, and look, because I stand cheap.
12 Not toward you, all passersby! look and see if there is a hurt like mine that has been inflicted on me, the sorrow Jehovah gave me in his day of anger.
13 From aloft he sent fire down into my bones, he spread his net for my feet, drove me backward, struck me desolate, sick all day.
14 He paid attention to my offenses; they interwove in his hands, they came up over my neck, he brought my strength to a fall.
The Lord gave me into the hands of those against whom I cannot stand up. 15 The Lord has spurned all my braves within me, has called a convention against me to mangle my young men, trodden winepress for Judah’s maiden daughter.
16 Over these things I weep, my eye streams down water, because far away is any who would comfort me, would bring me back to life, my sons are desolate because an enemy is in power.
17 Sion spreads out her hands, has no comforter. Jehovah has commissioned Jacob’s foes all round him, Jerusalem has become a piece of garbage among them.
18 Jehovah is in the right, because I had disobeyed him.
Listen, all peoples, and see my hurt! My maidens and young men have gone into foreign slavery.
19 I called to my lovers; they failed me.
21 Listen when I moan!
I have no comforter.
All my enemies hear of my calamity, they rejoice because you acted. Bring the day you have announced and let them be like me!
22 Let all their viciousness come before you and treat them as you treated me for all my crimes.For my moans are many and my heart is sick.
2:1-22
2 How the Lord in his anger clouds Sion’s daughter in, has thrown the magnificence of Israel from sky to earth, and not remembered his footstool on his day of anger!
2 The Lord has unsparingly swept off all Jacob’s meadows, has in his wrath demolished the fortifications of the daughter of Judah, has laid in the dust, desecrated, a kingdom and its generals.
3 In his anger he has chopped off every horn of Israel’s, turned his right hand backward before an enemy, and blazed in Jacob like a flaming fire devouring on all sides.
4 He has bent his bow like an enemy, brought up his right hand like a foe, and killed all that were a delight to the eye; on the tent of the daughter of Sion he has poured his choler like fire.
6 And he has ruthlessly dismantled her lodge like a shack in a garden, has ruined her meeting-place, Jehovah has caused meeting-day and sabbath to be forgotten in Sion, and in his angry hostility has contemned king and priest.
7 The Lord has repudiated his altar, ignored his sanctuary, given up to an enemy the walls of her palaces; they made a noise in Jehovah’s house that sounded like an annual feast.
8 Jehovah planned to wreck the walls of the daughter of Sion; he stretched a line, did not turn his hand back from sweeping it down, and let bulwark and wall mourn, forlorn together.
9 Her gates have sunk into the earth; he has destroyed and shattered her bars; her king and generals are among the nations; there are no rulings on religion; her prophets too have not found any vision from Jehovah.
10 The elders of the daughter of Sion sit silent on the ground, have put earth over their heads, have belted on sackcloths; the maidens of Jerusalem have put their heads down on the ground.
11 My eyes are used up in tears, my vitals are boiling, my heart runs out of me for the broken bones of the daughter of my people, when little boy and baby collapse in town squares;
12 They say to their mothers “Where is some grain and wine?” while they faint away in city squares like a man mortally wounded, while their life runs out in their mothers’ laps.
13 What shall I quote to you, what shall I compare you to, daughter Jerusalem? what shall I parallel to you to comfort you, maiden daughter of Sion? for your mauling is great as the sea; who shall heal you?
14 Your prophets have furnished you futile and unctuous visions, have not spoken out about your guilt to bring you back but have given you visions that are delusion, futility, and exile.
15 All passersby struck their hands together over you, whistled and shook their heads at the daughter of Jerusalem: “Is this the city that was spoken of as perfect in beauty, a joy to all the earth?”
16 All your enemies opened their mouths wide at you, whistled and ground their teeth, said “We have made a clean sweep; this is just the day we were hoping for; it has turned up, we see the sight.”
17 Jehovah has done what he designed, finished up his dictate that he ordained from olden days, demolished unsparingly, gladdened your enemies over you, given your foes a high horn.
18 Their hearts cried out to the Lord hotly; daughter of Sion, pour down your tears like a flooded brook day and night, take no anodyne, let your eyeball never be still.
19 Stand up and clamor in the night, at each new watch, pour out your hearts in Jehovah’s face like water, raise your hands to him for the lives of your boys and girls who have fainted away with hunger at the tops of all the streets.
20 See, Jehovah! look whom you have handled so! or should women eat their own fruit, their petted children? or should priest and prophet be killed in the Lord’s sanctuary?
21 Boy and old man are lying on the ground in the streets; my maidens and young men have fallen by the sword; on your day of anger you killed, slaughtered, had no mercy.
Those that I had petted and brought up my enemy has swept away.
3:1-66
3 I am the man that saw hardship by the cudgel of his wrath.
2 Me he drove along to go darkling, unlighted.
3 Only at me all day he kept turning back his hand.
4 He wore away my flesh and skin, shattered my bones,
5 Built siege-works against me and surrounded my head with hard experiences,
6 Seated me in places of darkness like men long since dead.
7 He walled me off so that I could not get out, made my fetters heavy.
8 Withal when I cried and clamored he shut off my prayer.
9 He walled up my road with masonry, kept me making detours.
10 An ambushed bear he was to me, a lion under cover.
11 My roads he filled with briers and tore my flesh, laid me desolate.
12 He strung his bow and set me up like a target for the arrow,
13 Sent in the contents of his quiver into my waist.
14 I became a butt for the laughter of all my people, for their jingles all day long.
15 He filled me up with bitter greens, gave me wormwood-juice for refreshment,
16 And rasped my teeth with gravel, thrust me down in the ashes.
17 And you banned my soul from welfare; I forgot such a thing as good,
18 And said “my continuance is lost, and my expectation from Jehovah.”
19 The recollection of my miserable and homeless state is wormwood and opium.
20 Recollect my soul does, and is downhearted within me.
21 This I will bring back to mind, will therefore wait,
22 Jehovah’s friendlinesses, that they are not exhausted, that his sympathy has not come to an end,
23 New every morning; great is your loyalty.
24 Jehovah is my portion, my soul has said; therefore I will wait for him.
25 Jehovah is good to those who hope in him, to a soul that betakes itself to him.
26 Good it is that one wait, and in silence, for Jehovah’s salvation.
27 Good it is for a man that he carry a yoke in his youth,
28 Sit alone and be still because it was laid on him,
29 Put his mouth in the dust,perhaps there may be hope,
30 Give his cheek to the one who strikes him, take his fill of humiliation.
31 For the Lord will not repudiate man forever,
32 For if he causes misery he will have sympathy in accordance with his great friendliness,
33 For he does not arbitrarily grind down sons of man and bring them to misery.
34 To beating down underfoot all earth’s prisoners,
35 To warping the law against a man in the face of the Most High,
36 To circumventing a man in his suit over his rights, the Lord does not assent.
37 Who is there that says a thing and has it come when the Lord has not ordered it?
38 Do not evils and good come out of the mouth of the Most High?
39 What should a living man bemoan, a man over his sin?
40 Let us search our course and examine it, and come back to Jehovah.
41 Let us hold up our hearts in our hands to Deity in heaven.
42 We were criminal and disobedient; you did not forgive.
43 You overspread us with anger and pursued us, you killed without mercy.
44 You overspread yourself with a cloud to keep our prayers from coming through.
45 You are making us an offscouring and a bit of refuse among the peoples.
46 All our enemies have opened their mouths wide at us.
47 We face dread and chasm, breaking and crash.
48 My eyes run streams of water for the breaking of the daughter of my people.
49 My eyes are running out and never halting for lack of a soothing balm.
50 Till Jehovah from the sky looks out and sees, 51 My eyes handle my soul cruelly because of all the daughters of my city.
52 My unprovoked enemies hunted me down like a sparrow. 53 They extinguished my life in the pit and flung stones on me.
54 Water rolled over my head; I thought “It is all over with me.”
55 I called your name, Jehovah, out of the abysmal pit;
56 You heard my voice, “Do not let your ears disregard my freedom, my clamor.”
57 You drew near on the day I called you, you said “Do not be afraid.”
58 You upheld my right to exist, Lord, you stood up for my life.
59 You, Jehovah, saw the chicanery against me, did justice for me.
60 You saw all their revengefulness, all that they thought of for me.
61 You heard their taunts, Jehovah, all that they thought of against me,
62 My assailants’ lips and their whispering against me all day. 63 Look at their sitting down and standing up; I am the butt of their jingles.
64 You will give them back, Jehovah, treatment that matches the work of their hands:
65 You will give them infatuated minds, your curse for them,
66 Will pursue them in anger and root them out from under Jehovah’s sky.
Lamentations
4:1-22
4 How gold is tarnishing, the best nuggets deteriorating, Sacred stones being spilled at every street-corner!
2 Sion’s most precious sons, prized at their weight in red gold, how they were classed with earthen jars, work of a potter’s hands!
3 Even jackals offer a teat, suckle their cubs; the daughter of my people became cruel like the ostriches in the wilderness.
4 A sucking baby’s tongue stuck to its palate for thirst. Children asked for bread, had nobody that handed it to them.
5 Those who had been eating with dainties were starving about the streets.
6 And the guilt of the daughter of my people showed greater than the sin of Sodom that was overthrown all at once and hands were not busy on her.
7 Her devotees were more stainless than snow, more white than milk, redder-limbed than coral, their tattooing lapis lazuli.
8 Their figures turned darker than charcoal, they were not to be recognized on the street; their skins shrank over their bones, dried out, became like wood.
9 Those who were struck down by swords were better off than those who were struck down by starvation, inasmuch as those, stabbed through, would flow out in field crops.
10 The hands of tenderhearted women cooked their own children, they served as mourning-dinner for them at the catastrophe of the daughter of my people.
11 Jehovah wreaked his ire, poured out his anger, and kindled a fire in Sion which consumed her foundations. 12 The kings of earth, and all the inhabitants of the world, had not believed that foe and enemy would come in at Jerusalem’s gates. 13 For the sins of her prophets, the guilts of her priests, who shed honest men’s blood within her,
5:1-22
2 Our estate has swung to strangers, our houses to foreigners.
3 We have become fatherless orphans, our mothers the same as widows.
4 We have been drinking our water for cash our wood comes in at a price.
5 We have had the pursuers close at our heels, have been tired out, have been given no rest.
6 We have given ourselves up in Egypt, in Assyria, to get a full meal.
7 Our fathers sinned; they are gone, and we have been carrying their guilt.
8 Slaves have become rulers over us; there is nobody to tear us out of their hand
9 We get our bread in at the cost of our lives because of the wilderness sword.
10 Our skin is hot as a baking-crock by the fever of starvation.
11 They deflowered women in Sion, maidens in the cities of Judah.
12 Generals were impaled by their hands, to elders’ faces no deference was paid.
13 Young men carried mills and boys stumbled with timber.
14 Old men have desisted from sitting in gates, young men from their lute-playing.
15 The joyousness of our hearts has ceased, our dancing is turned to mourning,
16 The crown on our heads has fallen; woe is ours, because we have sinned.
17 It is for this our hearts have grown sick, it is for these things our eyes are darkened,
18 For Mount Sion, that it is desolated; foxes walk over it. 19 You, Jehovah, are seated forever; your throne is for generations upon generations;
9 And God gave Daniel the friendliness and sympathy of the chief eunuch.
21 And Daniel lasted to the year one of King Cyrus. Daniel
So show the dream and its interpretation.”
19 Then the secret was revealed to Daniel in a vision of the night.
36 This was the dream; and we will tell the interpretation before the king.
Then those men were brought before the king.
He answered by ordering the furnace heated seven times hotter than was normal 20 and ordering powerful men of his troops to bind Shadrac, Meshac, and ʽAbed-Nego, to throw them into the furnace with the fire burning.
21 Then those men were bound in their cloaks, trousers, caps, and clothing, and were thrown into the heart of the furnace with the fire burning.
22 Thereupon, since the king’s word was rigorous and the furnace was heated intensely, the blaze of the fire killed those men who lifted Shadrac, Meshac, and ʽAbed-Nego.
23 And those men all three of them, Shadrac, Meshac, and ʽAbed-Nego, fell down bound into the heart of the furnace with the fire burning.
They answered the king “Yes, your majesty.”
25 He answered “Here I see four men unbound walking unharmed in the heart of the fire, and the look of the fourth is like a son of a god.”
Daniel
4:1-37
4 King Nebucadnessar to all the peoples, nations, and languages that live in all the earth: Great be your peace.
2 I have thought best to announce the tokens and wonders which the Most High God has performed in my case.
3 How great his tokens are, and how mighty his wonders! his empire is an eternal empire, and his dominion accompanies generation upon generation.
4 I, Nebucadnessar, was comfortable in my house and flourishing in my palace.
5 I had a dream, and it terrified me; and a nightmare in my bed, and the sights that came to my head alarmed me. 6 And my order was given to bring in before me all the wise men of Babylon to make known to me the interpretation of the dream.
10 And the sights that came to my head in my bed were
28 It all overtook King Nebucadnessar.
29 At the end of twelve months he was walking on the roof of the royal palace in Babylon.
5 King Belshassar gave a great dinner to a thousand of his lords and drank wine before the thousand.
2 Belshassar, inspired by the wine, ordered that the gold and silver vessels which his father Nebucadnessar had taken out of the temple at Jerusalem be brought for the king and his lords, his wives and his concubines, to drink from.
3 Then the gold vessels they took out of the temple at Jerusalem were brought, and the king and his lords, his wives and his concubines, drank from them,
4 drank the wine and praised the golden and silver and bronze and iron and wooden and stone gods.
5 That moment fingers of a human hand came out and wrote, opposite the lamp, on the whitewashed wall of the royal palace, and the king saw the writing hand.
6 Then the king changed color and the things he thought of alarmed him, his hip-joints went loose and his knees knocked together;
7 the king called loudly to bring in the exorcists, Chaldeans, and diviners.
The king said to the wise men of Babylon that any man who should read that writing and show its interpretation should wear purple and have a gold necklace round his neck and have tritarch authority in the empire.
8 Then all the king’s wise men were coming in and not proving competent to read the writing and make the interpretation known to the king.
9 Then King Belshassar was greatly alarmed and changed color, and his lords were bewildered.
10 In consequence of the words of the king and his lords the queen came into the banquet house.
The queen responded “May your majesty live forever!
Do not let the things you think of alarm you, and do not change color so.
11 There is a man in your kingdom who has in him a spirit from holy gods, and in your father’s time enlightenment and insight and wisdom like that of gods was found in him, and your royal father Nebucadnessar set him up as chief of sorcerers, exorcists, Chaldeans, diviners, your royal father.
12 Inasmuch as notable inspiration and knowledge and insight, interpretation of dreams and solution of riddles and unraveling of knotty problems, are found in him, Daniel, whom the king named Belteshassar, now let Daniel be called and he will show the interpretation.”
13 Then Daniel was brought in before the king.
The king said to Daniel “You are Daniel, one of the Jewish deportees whom the king my father brought from Judah?
14 then I hear that you have in you a divine spirit, and enlightenment and insight and notable wisdom have been found in you.
15 Now the wise men, the exorcists, have been brought in before me to read this writing and make its interpretation known, but they were not competent to show the interpretation of the word.
16 And I hear that you can expound interpretations and unravel knotty problems.
Now if you can read the writing and make known the interpretation of it, you shall wear purple and have a gold necklace round your neck and have tritarch authority in the empire.”
17 Then Daniel answered before the king “Keep your gifts to yourself and give your grants to another; but I will read the writing to your majesty and make known the interpretation of it.
Daniel 6:1-28
18 Then the king went to his palace and spent the night fasting, and did not have music brought before him, and his sleep would not come.
25 Then King Darius wrote to all the peoples, nations, and languages that live in all the earth “Great be your peace.
27 He saves and delivers and performs tokens and wonders, he who has saved Daniel out of the power of the lions.”
28 And this Daniel did well under the reign of Darius and that of Cyrus the Persian.
7:1-28
5 “And on came another beast, a second, resembling a bear, which had got on its feet on one side, and had in its mouth three ribs between its teeth; and they said to it ‘Up, eat much flesh!’
The court took its seat and books were opened.
28 “With this the whole was at an end.
I, Daniel, was much alarmed by the things I thought of, and changed color.
But I laid the matter up in my mind.”
Daniel 8:1-27
8 In the year three of King Belshassar’s reign a vision appeared to me, Daniel, following out the one I had seen at first. 2 And I saw in the vision
and when I saw it I was in Susa Citadel in the province of ʽElam
I saw in the vision that I was by Ulai Run, 3 and I raised my eyes and saw that there was a ram standing in front of the Run; and it had two horns, and the horns were tall, the one taller than the other, and the taller coming up behind.
4 I saw the ram butting west and north and south, and no beasts could stand before it, and there was nobody to give deliverance from its power, and it did as it pleased and made a great record.
5 And as I was taking it in, there, coming from the west over the face of all the earth, was a he-goat; and the goat had a strikingly large horn between its eyes.
And he said to me “Understand, man; for the vision is for an ultimate time.”
26 And the spoken disclosure of the evenings and mornings is truth.
But as for you, keep the vision under a stopper, for it is a longtime one.”
But I was appalled at the inexplicable vision.
Daniel 9:1-27
7 For you, Lord, is the right, but for us shame of face, as we have it this day, for the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem and all Israel, those who are near and those who are far away in all the countries into which you banished them for their unfaithfulness that they had committed against you.
And we did not propitiate Jehovah by turning back from our guilty ways and considering your truth, 14 and Jehovah attended to the disaster and brought it upon us.
For our God Jehovah is in the right as to all that he has done, and we did not obey him.
we have sinned, we are in the wrong, 16
19 Lord, hear! Lord, forgive!
Lord, listen and act! do not delay, my God, because your city and your people wear your name.”
23 At the beginning of your supplications word went out, and I have come to make the announcement, because you are a favorite.
10 In the year three of King Cyrus of Persia a matter was revealed to Daniel who was named Belteshassar; and the word was true, but a great task; but he understood the word and had insight into the apparition.
And I had no strength left in me, and my good health turned into a breakdown and I retained no strength.
And with his speaking these words I stood up shivering.
12 And he said to me
“Do not be afraid, Daniel, because from the first day when you put your mind to studying and behaving submissively before your God your words were heard, and I came at your words; 13 but the prince of the Persian empire stood in my way twenty-one days.
But here has Micael, one of the chief princes, come to help me, and I was superfluous with the kings of Persia 14 and came to expound to you what is to befall your people in future time
for there is yet a vision for the time.”
15 And while he spoke these words with me I had my face toward the ground and was dumb.
21 I will inform you, though, of what is inscribed in a record of truth.
And there is nobody holding firmly with me against these except your own prince Micael;
11:1-45
11 and for my own part it was in the year one of Darius the Mede that I took my stand to reinforce and strengthen him.
2 And now I will tell you the truth:
“Persia has three kings yet to stand; and the fourth will amass greater wealth than all; and when he is strong in wealth, everything will stir up the kingdom of Greece.
3 And there will stand a formidable king, and he will rule a great dominion and do as he pleases.
4 But as he stands his empire will break and divide toward the four winds of the sky, but not for his posterity nor with the like of his sway that he held; for his empire will be uprooted and belong to others beside these.
5 “And the king of the south will be strong, but one of his generals will be stronger against him and will rule a dominion greater than his.
6 And at the end of years they will ally themselves, and the daughter of the king of the south will come to the king of the north to bring about an accord, but will not retain strength of arm and his two arms will not stand, and she will be betrayed and those who brought her in and he who gave birth to her and he who strengthens her at the times.
7 But part of the sprouting of her roots will replace him, and will come to the bulwark and come into the stronghold of the king of the north and will do his business in them and be strong.
8 And their gods too, with their statues, with their exquisite vessels in silver and in gold, he will bring captured to Egypt; and, he keeping away from the king of the north for some years, 9 he will invade the empire of the king of the south, but go back to his own land.
10 “But his sons will start hostilities and get together a numerous body of troops, and he will go in sweeping everything before him and passing off; but he will come back, and hostilities will continue up to his stronghold.
and this up to a time.
27 And the kings will both have evil intentions, and they will speak lies over one table; but it will not be successful, because there is yet to be an end at the destined time.
28 And he will go back to his own country with a great stock of goods; and his mind will be against a sacred covenant, and he will do things and go back to his own country.
32 And those who bring wickedness into a covenant will foment irreligion by slippery methods; but a people that know their God will be vigorous and take action.
33 And the enlighteners of a people will bring most to sound views; but they will come to grief in sword and flame, in enslavement and plundering, for a while.
37 And to the gods of his fathers he will pay no attention, and to the Desire of Women, or any god, he will pay no attention, because he plays the part of great one against all.
41 And he will come into the land of the crowning glory, and myriads will come to grief; but these will come through safe from his hands, Edom and Moab and the chief part of the Bene-ʽAmmon.
Daniel 12:1-13
3 and the enlighteners will have a brightness like the resplendence of the firmament, and those who make the many righteous like the stars forevermore.
4 But as for you, Daniel, keep the things under a stopper and seal the book till an ultimate date; many will go ranging about, and disasters will abound.”
5 And I, Daniel, saw that there were two others standing one on this bank of the river and one on that bank;
6 and one said to the man dressed in linen who was over the water of the river “How long till the end of the mysteries?”
7 And I heard the man dressed in linen who was over the water of the river, lifting his right hand and his left hand toward the sky, swear by him who lives forever that in a time, times, and a half, and when the smashing of the arms of a holy people is finished, finished will these things be.
8 And I myself heard, but did not understand, and said “My lord, what will be the latter part of these things?”
9 And he said “Go, Daniel, for the words are stoppered and sealed till an ultimate date.
10 Many will be sifted and scrubbed and smelted, and wrong-doers will do wrong, and no wrong-doers will understand, but the judicious will understand.
11 And from the date of the displacing of the regular sacrifice to the putting in of an appalling disgustment is twelve hundred and ninety days.
12 Happy he who waits and comes up to thirteen hundred and thirty-five days.
13 But as for you, go rest; for there is some time yet, and destined periods are to be filled out at the end, and you are to rest, and stand on your feet at the end of the time.” Hosea
1:1-11 1 Jehovah’s word that came to Hosheaʽ the son of Beeri in the times of Kings ʽUzzijah, Jotham, Ahaz, Hezekiah, of Judah; and the beginning of Jehovah’s speaking by Hosheaʽ was in the time of Jeroboam the son of Joash, king of Israel.
2 And Jehovah said to Hosheaʽ “Go take an illegitimate wife and illegitimate children, because the country is prostituting itself to desert Jehovah.”
3 And he went and took Gomer the daughter of Diblaim.
And she became pregnant and bore him a son;
4 and Jehovah said to him “Name him Jezreʽel, because in a little while I will punish the house of Jehu for the bloodshed at Jezreʽel and will abolish the kingdom of the house of Israel;
5 and on that day I will break Israel’s bow in Jezreʽel Vale.”
6 And she became pregnant again and bore a daughter; and he said to him “Name her Lo-Ruhamah, because I will no longer continue to have tenderness for the house of Israel, but will hate them outright.
7 But for the house of Judah I will have tenderness, and will save them by their God Jehovah, and will not save them by bow and sword and war, by ponies and horses.”
8 And she weaned Lo-Ruhamah, and became pregnant and bore a son;
9 and he said “Name him Lo-ʽAmmi, because you are not my people and I am not your God.”
11 2:2 And the sons of Judah and the sons of Israel together shall gather and elect one head and come up from the country, because great is the day of Jezreʽel. Hosea
2:1-23 2 2:3 Call your brothers ʽAmmi and your sisters Ruhamah.
3 2:5 for fear I should strip her naked and set her as on the day of her birth and make her like a wilderness and render her like a dried-out country and kill her with thirst,
4 2:6 and have no tenderness for her children, because they are illegitimate children;
5 2:7 because their mother was unchaste, she whose body bred them acted shamelessly, because she thought “Let me follow my lovers that give me my bread and water, my wool and flax, my oil and drink.”
6 2:8 So I am pleaching up her road with briers and mending her fence, and she shall not find her paths;
7 2:9 and she shall pursue her lovers and not overtake them, and look for them and not find them, and think “I will go off back to my first husband, because I was better off then than now”;
8 2:10 and she had not known that it was I who gave her the grain and the grape-juice and the oil, and let her have much silver, and gold which they worked up for the Baal.
9 2:11 So I will reverse it and take back my grain at its season and my grape-juice at its date, and snatch away my wool and flax to cover her nakedness;
10 2:12 I will now uncover her indecency in sight of her lovers, and nobody shall rescue her out of my hands.
11 2:13 And I will stop all her delights, her feasts, her new moons, and her sabbaths, and all her dates,
12 2:14 and lay waste her vines and fig-trees of which she thought “They are a tip that my lovers have given me,” and make them into a scrubwood that the wild beasts will eat,
13 2:15 and I will punish her for the days of the Baals to whom she made burnings and bejeweled herself with her nose-ring and pendant and went after her lovers and forgot me, quoth Jehovah.
14 2:16 So I am going to inveigle her and get her into the wilderness and talk of love to her,
17 2:19 and I will take the names of the Baals out of your mouth and they shall no longer be named.
20 2:22 betroth you by loyalty, and you shall know Jehovah.
Hosea
3:1-5
3 And Jehovah said to me “Again go love a woman loved by a paramour and living an adulterous life, as Jehovah loves the sons of Israel while they face toward other gods and love cakes of raisins.”
2 And I purchased her for fifteen shekels of silver and twelve bushels of barley,
3 and said to her “You shall stay mine a long time, never be debauched nor let a man have you; and I on my part will give my attentions to you.”
4 For the sons of Israel shall stay a long time without king and without general and without sacrifice and without obelisk and without ephod and teraphim;
Hosea 4:1-19
2 swearing and lying, and murdering and stealing, and adultery; they live by violence, and bloodshed treads on the heels of bloodshed.
4 Only let not any man fight the case, let not any man reprimand your people are the sort that fight a case with a priest.
5 And you shall stumble today, and a prophet too with you shall stumble in the night; and I will cut off your mother.
6 My people is cut off because of not knowing.
Because you have rejected knowledge I have rejected you from being priest to me; you have forgotten your God’s instructions, I on my part will forget your sons.
7 The more there were of them the more they sinned against me I will substitute contempt for your honors.
8 They eat my people’s sin and fix their appetite on its guilt.
9 And the priest will be the same as the people, and I will punish him for his courses and send retribution for his practices.
10 And they shall eat and not feel full, live licentiously and not be prolific, because they have left Jehovah,
11 faithfully keeping up unchastity and wine and grape-juice that take away the brain.
12 My people puts questions to its bit of wood, and its staff informs it, because a spirit of prostitution has misled them and they have gone from under Jehovah into prostitution.
13 They sacrifice on the mountaintops and make burnings on the hilltops, under oak and storax and terebinth, because their shade is good.
Therefore your daughters prostitute themselves and your daughters-in-law take to adultery.
14 I will not punish your daughters because they prostitute themselves nor your daughters-in-law because they take to adultery, for those men themselves go apart with loose women and sacrifice with religious prostitutes; and an unintelligent class lets itself be hustled down.
15 If you, Israel, are unchaste, let Judah not incur guilt.
And do not go into the Gilgal nor up to Beth-Aven, nor swear “By Jehovah.”
16 For Israel has been balking like a balky cow now Jehovah is to pasture them like a sheep in the open!
17 Ephraim is partner with idols; let him alone.
18 Their drink passes off, they take to lechery; her shields do love contempt.
5:1-15
10 Judah’s generals have been like those that displace a boundary-mark; I will pour out my wrath on them like water.
11 Ephraim is denied justice, is persecuted in judgment, because they insisted on following a mandate.
12 And I am like a moth to Ephraim, and like dry-rot to the house of Judah.
2 He will make us well in two days, the third day he will have us standing up, to be alive before him and know him.
3 Let us strive to know Jehovah; like gray dawn, his coming up is ready; and he will come to us like rain, like spring rains watering earth.
4 What shall I do with you, Ephraim? what shall I do with you, Judah? your friendliness is like a morning cloud and like dew that goes off the first thing in the morning.
5 Therefore I have hewed with prophets, killed them with the say of my mouth; and my judgment comes out like daylight,
6 that I take pleasure in friendliness, not in sacrifice, and in acquaintance with God rather than in burnt-offerings.
7 But they have broken treaty at Adam; there they have played me false;
8 Gilead is a town of villains, tracked with blood;
9 and as a man hides seed-corn priests have hid my ways; they have murdered at Shekem because they were committing enormity.
10 In the house of Israel I have seen a horror; there Ephraim had prostitution, Israel was defiled;
11 Judah too has fixed a harvest for you. Hosea 7:1-16
3 In their wickedness they make a king merry, in their deceitfulness generals;
4 they are all carrying on adultery.
5 On our king’s day they have made generals sick with heat from wine; he dragged his hand with cynics.
7 They all grow hot like a baking-crock, and eat up their judges: all their kings have fallen, there is no one that calls on me among them.
8 Ephraim is getting stirred in among the nations; Ephraim has come to be an unturned cake.
11 And Ephraim has come to be like a brainless unwary pigeon: they call Egypt, they go to Assyria.
12 While they are going I will spread my net over them, bring them down like birds of the air, cage them for trouble like quails.
13 It is woe to them, because they have lost touch with me; it is spoliation for them, because they have rebelled against me; and I was ransoming them and they made lying talk against me,
14 and they did not cry to me in their hearts when they were howling on their beds, lodging away from home on account of grain and grape-juice, turning in to lodge with me.
15 And I had disciplined, strengthened their arms, and they were thinking up evil against me.
In their own country foes oppress them;
8:1-14
8 they fly like a vulture against Jehovah’s house since they have violated my covenant and been rebellious against my instructions.
2 They cry to me “My God”; we know you, Israel.
3 Israel has repudiated what is good; an enemy will pursue them.
4 They have set up kings, but not from me; a government, and I did not know it.
Their silver and gold they have made into idols, to have it swept away.
5 Your calf, Samaria, is repudiated; I am angry with them how long will they be incapable of innocence?
6 because it comes from Israel, a mechanic has made it, it is not a god.
For Samaria’s calf shall go to splinters.
7 For they sow wind and reap whirlwind; it all has no stalk, a greenery that will yield no meal or if it should, outsiders would swallow it.
8 Israel is swallowed up; now they have become among the nations like an unwanted piece of furniture.
9 For they have gone up to Assyria, a wild ass running alone; to Egypt they have given love-gifts.
10 When they do give among the nations, now I will gather them and they shall begin a small part of the burden of the king of princes.
11 Because Ephraim has made many altars for sin-offerings, they have had them as altars for offering sins.
12 I would write down for them my multitudinous instructions; they have been rated a sickening thing.
13 They sacrifice meat as broiled sacrifices and eat it; Jehovah has not accepted them; now he will remember their guilt and punish their sins: they shall go back to Egypt.
14 And Israel has forgotten his Maker and built temples, and Judah has fortified many a city; but I will send a fire into his cities and it shall devour his palaces.
9:1-17
9 Do not make merry exultantly like the peoples, Israel, because you have prostituted yourself to be disloyal to Jehovah; you have loved the prostitute’s gain on every threshing-floor of grain.
2 Threshing-floor and wine-vat shall not feed them, and grape-juice shall disappoint them;
3 they shall not live in Jehovah’s country, but Ephraim shall go back to Egypt and they shall eat unclean food in Assyria.
4 They shall not pour libations of wine to Jehovah, not lay out their sacrifices for him; their sacrifices shall be to them like trouble-bread, whose eaters all become unclean, because their bread is for their appetites, it is not to come into Jehovah’s house.
5 What will you do on the anniversary day, the day of Jehovah’s feasts?
6 because they are gone owing to rapine, Egypt is to gather them, Memphis is to bury them; their silver attractions nettles shall possess, briers be in their homes.
7 The days of punishment have come, the days of retribution have come, Israel shall know; the prophet is an ignoramus, the inspired man a lunatic, because of the excess of your guilt.
8 Ephraim’s watchman with my God suffers great spite; the prophet has fowlers’ traps on all his paths, spite in his God’s house; they have dug his pit deep.
9 As in Gibeah’s days he will remember their guilt, will punish their sins.
10 I found Israel like grapes in the wilderness, I saw your fathers like an early fig on the tree at the first of its crop; they came to Baal-Peghor and performed rites to the Shame and became objects of disgust as they loved to.
11 Ephraim’s glories are taking flight like a bird: off from birth, off from expectations of birth.
12 If they do raise their children I will bereave them of every human being; yea, woe to them when I go back from them.
13 Ephraim has stocked himself with daughters for a foe; Ephraim has to bring out his sons to a killer.
14 Give them, Jehovah what will you give? give them a miscarrying womb and shriveled breasts.
16 Ephraim is smitten; their roots are dried up, no fruit will they produce.
Even if they have T children I will bring death to their welcome offspring.
10:1-15
10 Israel is a luxuriant grapevine that loads itself with fruit.
The more he had of fruit, the more he made of altars; the better off his country, the finer he made obelisks.
2 Their hearts are slippery.
Now they must smart for it; he will break the necks of their altars, make havoc of their obelisks.
3 For now they will be saying “We have no king, because we do not fear Jehovah and what will the king do to us?”
4 talking and talking, taking empty oaths, making covenants, and justice shooting up like poppies in furrows in the field.
5 The denizens of Samaria shall quail for the calf of Beth-Aven because his people and his komers are mourning for him, they howl for him because of his glory, because it is deported from him.
6 It too shall be taken to Assyria for a present to King Jareb; Ephraim shall take a humiliation, Israel be put to shame for its policy.
7 Samaria is cut off; her king is like a chip on the face of water.
8 And the heights of Aven, the sin of Israel, shall be extirpated; thorns and thistles shall grow up on their altars; and they shall say to the mountains “Cover us” and to the hills “Fall on us.”
9 Since the days of Gibeah you have sinned, Israel: there they stood, war was not to come home to them at Gibeah.
10 I have come against men of foul play to chastise them, and peoples shall be brought together against them, for their going off to their two crimes.
11 And Ephraim is a trained heifer that loves to thresh and I myself have passed over her fine neck; I will harness Ephraim; Judah shall plow, Jacob shall harrow for him.
12 Sow with honesty, reap in the way of friendliness, break new ground, and it is time to resort to Jehovah till he comes and gives you autumn rain of righteousness.
13 You have been plowing lawlessness, reaping foul play, eating the fruit of deceitfulness, because you have had confidence in your course, in the numerousness of your champions;
14 and yells shall rise in your cities, and all your fortress towns shall be sacked as Shalman sacked Beth-Arbel on a battle-day, mothers’ brains dashed out after their children’s:
15 I will do the like to you, house of Israel, because of your wicked wickedness; the king of Israel is cut off in the gray dawn.
Hosea 11:1-12
11 When Israel was a child I loved him, and I called his sons out of Egypt.
3 And I had taught Ephraim to walk, taken them in my arms; but they did not know I healed them.
5 He goes back to Egypt, and Assyria is his king, because they refused to come back.
6 And swords dance in his cities and annihilate his bragging, and their designs eat them up.
8 How am I to give you away, Ephraim, to hand you over, Israel?
12:1-14
12 12:2 Ephraim is a wind-eater, an east-wind-chaser; all day long they pile up lies and shams, and they make treaties with Assyria and take oil to Egypt.
2 12:3 Jehovah has a quarrel with Judah, to give Jacob a punishment to match his courses, a return to match his practices.
3 12:4 In his mother’s body he caught his brother’s heel, and in his prime he struggled with God;
4 12:5 he struggled with an angel and succeeded; he wept and begged him for grace; he was to find him at Bethel and there he was to speak with him.
5 12:6 But Jehovah is the God of Armies; Jehovah is his proper name;
6 12:7 and you are to come back by your God.
Attend to friendliness and justice, and hope toward your God always.
7 12:8 Canaan has cheating balances in his hands; he loves to overreach.
8 12:9 And Ephraim thinks “I have got downright rich, I have made a fortune”; all that he has got by his work will not suffice for the guilt he has incurred.
9 12:10 But I am your God Jehovah since Egypt; I will set you to living in tents again as you do in the days of an annual feast,
10 12:11 and I will speak to prophets, having myself given many a vision, and by prophets I will whisper.
12 12:13 And Jacob emigrated to the plains of Syria, and Israel worked for a wife, and for a wife he kept guard;
13 12:14 and by a prophet Jehovah brought Israel up from Egypt, and by a prophet he was guarded.
Hosea
13:1-16
13 When Ephraim spoke he made Israel’s hair stand on end; but he incurred guilt by the Baal, and he died.
2 And now they go on sinning and have made themselves figures in idol form out of their silver, all artisans’ work; “to them,” say they, “sacrifice”; men kiss calves.
3 So they shall be like a morning cloud and like dew that goes off the first thing in the morning, like chaff driving off a threshing-floor and like smoke out of a smoke-hole.
4 But I am your God Jehovah since Egypt, and you are not to know any God but me, and beside me there is no savior.
5 I knew you in the wilderness, in a country of parching drought.
6 When they had pasture they ate their fill; they ate their fill and their hearts went high; therefore they forgot me.
7 And I became like a lion to them, gazing like a leopard by a road,
8 meeting with them like a bear that has lost its cubs, to tear their chests and eat them there like a lioness and have the wild beasts rip them up.
9 You are ruined, Israel, for who is your help?
10 Where is your king to save you, and all your generals to do you justice, that you said “Give me a king and generals”?
11 I give you a king in my anger and take him from you in my wrath.
12 Ephraim’s guilt is packed up, his sin is laid by.
13 A mother’s birth-pains are coming for him; he is an unwise son, for it is time children should not stop in the mouth of the womb.
14 I was to redeem them out of the hands of the grave, to bring them off out of death.
Up with your pestilences, death! up with your poison, grave! compunction is shrouded from my sight.
That one will pillage the whole hoard of choice articles;
14 Come back, Israel, to your God, because you came to grief by your guilt.
1:1-20 1 Jehovah’s word that came to Joel the son of Pethuel.
8 Lament like a maiden with a sackcloth tied round her for the spouse of her girlhood.
15 O, O, the day! for Jehovah’s day is near and like a shattering from Shaddai it comes.
16 Is not food swept away before your eyes, gladness and glee from the house of our God?
17 Kernels are befouled with dirt under their brooms; storehouses are desolate; bins are demolished, because grain is a disappointment; what should we put in them?
18 Herds of cows wander about at random because there is no pasturage for them; the flocks of sheep too stand aghast.
19 To you, Jehovah, they call; for fire has eaten up wilderness pastures and flame has set ablaze all the trees on the range.
20 Even range beasts stretch up to you because water-bearing gorges are dried out and fire has eaten up wilderness pastures.
Joel
2 Blow a ram-horn in Sion and sound an alarm on my sacred mountain; let all the inhabitants of the country quake, because Jehovah’s day is coming, it is almost here,
2 a day of darkness and gloom, a day of cloud and thick air.
Over the mountains is spread like a daybreak a great and numerous people whose like has not come since the beginning of time nor will again be for generation after generation.
3 Before them a fire has eaten and behind them a flame blazes; the country is like the garden of ʽEden before them and is a desolate wilderness behind them, and there is not a thing that has escaped them.
4 Their looks are as if they were ponies, and just like horses they run;
5 with a sound as if of chariots they dance on the mountaintops, with a sound as if of a flame of fire eating up stubble, like a numerous soldiery drawn up for battle.
6 Before them peoples are unmanned, all faces are contorted.
7 They run like warriors, go up a wall like soldiers; and each goes along his own course, they do not borrow each other’s paths,
8 nor jostle each other, they go each along his own street; and they throw themselves in among the weapons without breaking their march.
9 They invade the city; they run on the wall, get up into the houses, get in through the windows like a thief.
10 Before them earth shook, sky quaked, sun and moon went dark and stars withheld their radiance,
11 and Jehovah made his voice heard before his troops, for very large is his army, numerous are they that carry out his will.
For great is Jehovah’s day, and very terrible, and who will hold out through it?
12 But even now, quoth Jehovah, come back to me with all your hearts and with fasting and weeping and wailing,
13 and tear your hearts and not your clothes and turn back to your God Jehovah, because he is kindly and tenderhearted, patient and very friendly, and repents of evil.
14 Who knows but he will turn back and repent and leave a blessing remaining behind him, a grain-offering and libation for our God Jehovah?
15 Sound a ram-horn in Sion, ordain a fast, proclaim a holiday; bring people together, ordain an assembly,
16 gather old men, bring together children from play and babies at the breasts; let bridegroom come out from his chamber, bride from her bower; let the priests, the servitors of Jehovah,
17 weep between the porch and the altar, and let them say “Spare your people, Jehovah, and do not give your estate to be taunted and to be ruled by heathen nations; why should they say among the peoples ‘Where is their God?’”
18 And Jehovah was jealous for his country and had mercy on his people;
19 and Jehovah answered his people “Here, I am sending you the grain and the grape-juice and the oil, and you shall have your fill of them, and I will not give you to be taunted again among the nations.
20 And I will take the northerner off you far away, and banish him to a country of drought and desolation, his face to the eastern sea and his hinder end to the western sea, for his stench to come up, because he has done great things.
21 Do not be afraid, soil; jubilate and make merry, because Jehovah has done great things.
22 Do not be afraid, beasts on the range, for wilderness pastures have come out, for trees have borne their fruit, fig-trees and grapevines have yielded their wealth,
23 and the sons of Sion will jubilate and make merry in your God Jehovah because he has given you refreshment fairly and sent down showers for you, autumn rain and spring rain as he had at first,
24 and the threshing-floors will be full of grain and the presses brimming with grape-juice and oil;
25 and I will make good to you the years that the spring and summer and fall and early grasshoppers ate, my great corps that I sent among you;
26 and you shall eat your fill on and on, and praise the name of your God Jehovah who has worked with you in extraordinary fashion; and my people shall not be put to shame forever,
27 and you shall know that I am in the midst of Israel, and I Jehovah am your God and there is no other, and my people shall not be put to shame forever.
28 And after this I will pour out my spirit on all mortals and your sons and daughters will be under the power, your old men will have dreams and your young men visions,
29 and on the very slaves I will pour out my spirit in those days;
30 and I will give prodigies in the sky and on the earth, blood and fire and columns of smoke;
31 the sun will be turned to darkness and the moon to blood before the coming of Jehovah’s great and terrible day.
32 And everyone who calls on Jehovah’s name will come off safe; for on Mount Sion and in Jerusalem there will be escape, as Jehovah has said, and among the survivors whom Jehovah calls.
3 For lo, in those days and at that time, when I come back to Judah and Jerusalem,
2 I will gather all the nations and bring them down to Jehoshaphat Vale, and I will plead against them there the case of my people and of my estate Israel, whom they have dispersed among the nations and divided up my country;
3 and over my people they threw lots, and gave a boy for a prostitute and sold a girl for wine and drank it up.
4 And, too, what is your relation to me, Tyre and Sidon and all the marches of Philistia? are you paying off a score against me? and if you are starting dealings with me, with promptest speed I will send your dealings back on your own heads,
5 that you have taken my silver and gold and brought into your temples the best of my things of beauty,
6 and the sons of Judah and of Jerusalem you have sold to the sons of the Greeks so as to get them far away from their territory:
7 here I am going to rouse them out of the place to which you sold them, and will send your dealings back on your own heads
8 and sell your sons and daughters into the hands of the sons of Judah, and they will sell them to the Shebaites into a far-off nation, because Jehovah has spoken.
9 Proclaim this among the nations: ordain war, rouse the champions, let all the soldiers come on and come up.
10 Pound your hoes into swords and your pruning-hooks into lances; let the weakling declare himself a champion.
11 Come with a rush, all nations from all sides, and gather; there, Jehovah, have your champions come down.
12 Let the nations be roused and come up to Jehoshaphat Vale; for there I will sit to judge all the nations from all sides.
13 Reach out a sickle, because harvest is ripe; go in, tread, because winepress is full, the presses are brimming because there is so much of their foam.
14 Hosts, hosts, in Decision Vale! for Jehovah’s day is near in Decision Vale.
15 Sun and moon go dark and stars withhold their radiance,
16 and Jehovah roars out of Sion and raises his voice from Jerusalem, and sky and earth shake, but Jehovah is a refuge for his people and a citadel for the sons of Israel.
17 And you shall know that I your God Jehovah make my abode on my sacred mountain Sion; and Jerusalem shall be sacred, and outsiders shall not pass through it again.
18 And on that day the mountains will drip pomegranate-wine and the hills will run milk, and all the ravines of Judah will run water; and a spring will come out of Jehovah’s house and water Acacia Arroyo.
19 Egypt will become a desolation and Edom will become a desolate wilderness, for their outrage on the sons of Judah whose innocent blood they shed in their country;
20 but Judah will be settled forever and Jerusalem to generation after generation.
21 And I will avenge their blood which I did not avenge; and Jehovah makes his abode in Sion.
Amos
1:1-15
1 The words of ʽAmos, who was among the Tekoaʽ breeders of shortlegged sheep, which he beheld about Israel in the time of King ʽUzzijah of Judah and of King Jeroboam the son of Joash of Israel, two years before the earthquake.
2 Said he, Jehovah will roar out of Sion and from Jerusalem he will raise his voice, and the shepherds’ pastures shall mourn and the top of Carmel dry up.
3 Says Jehovah, For Damascus’s three crimes and four, I will not turn it back, for their threshing Gilead with iron threshing-drags;
4 but I will send a fire into Hazael’s house and it shall devour Ben-Hadad’s palaces,
5 and I will break Damascus’s bar and cut off inhabitant from Aven’s plain and scepter-wielder from ʽEden’s house, and Syria’s people shall be deported to Kir, says Jehovah.
6 Says Jehovah, For Ghaza’s three crimes and four, I will not turn it back, for their deporting an entire population to hand them over to Edom;
7 but I will send a fire into Ghaza’s wall and it shall devour her palaces,
8 and I will cut off inhabitant from Ashdod and scepter-wielder from Ashkelon and bring my hand back against ʽEkron, and the remnant of the Philistines shall perish, says Jehovah.
9 Says Jehovah, For Tyre’s three crimes and four, I will not turn it back, for their handing over an entire population to Edom, and not remembering a treaty of brotherhood;
10 but I will send a fire into Tyre’s wall and it shall devour her palaces.
11 Says Jehovah, For Edom’s three crimes and four, I will not turn it back, for his chasing his brother with the sword and brutalizing his sympathies, letting his anger ravage everlastingly and keeping his wrath persistently;
12 but I will send a fire into Teman and it shall devour Bosrah’s palaces.
13 Says Jehovah, For the Bene-ʽAmmon’s three crimes and four, I will not turn it back, for their cutting open the pregnant women of Gilead in order to extend their territory;
14 but I will kindle a fire in Rabbah’s wall and it shall devour her palaces with cheering in a day of battle, with tempest in a day of gale,
15 and their king shall go to deportation, he and his generals together, says Jehovah.
2 Says Jehovah, For Moab’s three crimes and four, I will not turn it back, for his burning the bones of the king of Edom for lime;
2 but I will send a fire into Moab and it shall devour Kerijoth’s palaces, and Moab shall die in hubbub, with cheering, with sound of horn,
3 and I will cut off judge from her midst and kill all his generals with him, says Jehovah.
4 Says Jehovah, For Judah’s three crimes and four, I will not turn it back, for their rejecting Jehovah’s instructions and not keeping his usages, and being misled by their lies which their fathers followed;
5 but I will send a fire into Judah, and it shall devour Jerusalem’s palaces.
6 Says Jehovah, For Israel’s three crimes and four, I will not turn it back, for their selling out an honest man for silver and a poor man for a fee of a pair of sandals,
7 they who gulp at roadside dust on needy men’s heads and force humble men off their course, and a man and his father go to a girl so as to profane my hallowed name,
8 and on blankets pawned to them they turn in beside every altar and drink at the house of their God wine paid to them in fines.
9 And I had destroyed before them the Amorites whose tallness was like that of cedars and who were sturdy as oaks, but I destroyed their fruit above and their roots beneath.
10 And I had brought you up out of Egypt, and caused you to go through the wilderness forty years to take possession of the Amorites’ country,
11 and had caused sons of yours to rise as prophets and youths of yours as devotees is this not so, sons of Israel? quoth Jehovah;
12 but you gave the devotees wine and gave the prophets the order “You shall not prophesy.”
13 Here I am going to make you groan where you stand as a cart full of hay groans.
14 And a swift man shall lose the power of flight, and a strong man shall not rally his strength, and a brave man shall not save his life,
15 and the bowman shall not stand, and the swift-footed shall not escape, and the mounted man shall not save his life,
16 and the stoutest-hearted among the brave shall run away naked that day, quoth Jehovah.
3 Listen to this word that Jehovah has spoken about you, sons of Israel, about all the clan that I brought up out of Egypt:
2 You only I have known out of all the clans of the earth for that reason I will punish you for all your offenses.
3 Will two be walking together without their having held a tryst?
4 will a lion roar in the badlands without having a kill? will a two-year-old lion give tongue out of his lair without having caught anything?
5 will a bird drop into a trap on the ground without its having a bait? will a trap spring up from the ground without making a catch?
6 or will a ram-horn be blown in a city and the people not be alarmed? or will there be disaster in a city and Jehovah not have made it?
7 For Jehovah does not do a thing but he reveals his secret to his servants the prophets.
8 A lion roars: who will not fear?
The Lord Jehovah speaks: who will not prophesy?
9 Sound a summons over palaces in Ashdod and over palaces in Egypt and say “Come together on the mountains of Samaria and see many disorders in its midst and denials of justice within it.
10 And they do not know how to act squarely, quoth Jehovah, they who amass outrage and rapine in their palaces.”
11 So the Lord Jehovah says, Distress shall surround the land and strip your might off you, and your palaces shall be plundered.
12 Says Jehovah, As a shepherd rescues out of a lion’s mouth two legs or a piece of an ear, so will the sons of Israel be rescued, those who sit in Samaria on the corner of a couch and on the damask of a divan.
13 Listen, and warn the house of Jacob, quoth Jehovah the God of Armies,
14 because on the day when I punish Israel for its crimes I will punish the altars of Bethel, and the horns of the altar shall be chopped off and fall on the ground;
15 and I will strike the winter house along with the summer house, and the ivory houses shall go, and many a house shall come to its end, quoth Jehovah.
4:1-13
4 Listen to this word, Bashan cows on Samaria’s highland, that deny justice to needy men and persecute poor men, that say to their lords “Bring on, let’s drink!”
2 The Lord Jehovah has sworn by his divinity, Here are days coming upon you when you will be taken away with hooks and the last of you with fishhooks;
3 and you will go out of breaches, each straight out, and be thrown to the Harmon, quoth Jehovah.
4 Come to Bethel and commit crimes, to the Gilgal and commit many; and bring your sacrifices next morning, your tithes in three days,
5 and burn a thank-offering out of raised bread and proclaim volunteer offerings, advertise them, because that is the sort of thing you like, sons of Israel, quoth the Lord Jehovah.
6 And I on my part have given your cleanness of teeth in all your cities and scarcity of bread in all your places, and you did not come back to me, quoth Jehovah.
7 And so have I withheld the rain from you when it was still three months to harvest, and made it rain on one city and not made it rain on another city; one field would be rained on, and a field that I did not make it rain on would dry up;
8 and two or three cities would tramp to one city to drink water, and not get enough, and you did not come back to me, quoth Jehovah.
9 I have struck you with blasting and mildew; the bourgeoning of your gardens and vineyards, your fig-trees and olive-trees, the early grasshoppers would eat, and you did not come back to me, quoth Jehovah.
10 I have sent epidemics among you in Egyptian fashion; I have killed your young men in warfare, together with the carrying off of your ponies, and I have brought up into your nostrils the stench of the putrefaction of your armies, and you did not come back to me, quoth Jehovah.
11 I have done such overthrowing among you as God did to Sodom and Ghomorrah, and you have been like a burnt stick rescued out of a conflagration, and you did not come back to me, quoth Jehovah.
12 So I will do like this to you, Israel.
Because I will do this to you, prepare to meet your God, Israel;
13 for here is he who shaped mountains and created wind and tells man what is his inmost thought, he who makes dawn dusk and walks the heights of earth his name is Jehovah God of Armies.
5 Listen to this word that I am striking up about you, a dirge, house of Israel:
2 Maid Israel is down, shall rise no more, Is flung down on her own ground, has nobody to help her up.
3 For the Lord Jehovah says, The house of Israel shall have the city that went out a thousand left with a hundred and the city that went out a hundred left with ten.
4 For the Lord Jehovah says to the house of Israel, Resort to me and live,
5 and do not resort to Bethel; nor are you to go into the Gilgal nor pass Beer-Shebaʽ.
For the Gilgal shall depart deported and Beth-El shall become Aven.
6 Resort to Jehovah and live, for fear he should strike in with fire in the house of Joseph and Bethel have nobody to quench it,
7 those who turn the law to wormwood and leave right lying on the ground:
8 him who makes the Pleiades and Orion, and turns gloom to morning and darkens day to night, him who calls the waves of the sea and pours them on the land his name is Jehovah;
9 him who launches wreck upon a mighty one, and rapine comes upon a fortress.
10 They hate in the gate a corrector, and detest an honest talker.
11 So, since you trample on a needy man and take from him exactions of grain, you have built houses of dressed stone but you shall not live in them, you have planted fancy vineyards but you shall not drink the wine from them;
12 for I know your crimes are many and your sins profuse people that assail a man who has right on his side, that take composition-money, and put poor men out of court.
13 So the canny man in that time will be quiet, because it is a bad time.
14 Make good and not evil your object, in order that you may live and so Jehovah the God of Armies be with you as you say.
15 Hate evil and love good and plant justice in the gate: perhaps Jehovah the God of Armies will be gracious to the remnant of Joseph.
16 So Jehovah the God of Armies, the Lord, says, In all squares shall be wailing and in all streets they shall say “Alack, clack!” and issue a call of mourning to the farmer and wailing to experts in lamentation,
17 and in all vineyards shall be wailing, because I will go through your midst, says Jehovah.
18 Ha, you who hanker after Jehovah’s day! what do you want of Jehovah’s day? it is darkness and not light;
19 as a man runs away from a lion and encounters a bear, and goes into a house and rests his hand on the wall and a snake bites him.
20 Is not Jehovah’s day darkness and not light? murky and not radiant?
21 I hate, I reject your feasts, and will not smell your holiday scents.
22 For if you offer me burnt-offerings, I will not accept your offerings, nor will I look at your welfare-sacrifice of stall-fed calves.
23 Get your uproar of songs out of my way; your harp-music I do not listen to;
24 but let justice roll like water, and right like a perennial brook.
25 Did you bring on to me sacrifices and offerings in the wilderness forty years, house of Israel?
26 but you carried your King’s pavilion and your God’s housing.
27 But I will deport you beyond Damascus, says Jehovah, whose name is God of Armies.
6:1-14
6 Ha, you who are at ease in Sion, and you who are sure of your ground on Samaria Mountain, the distinguished of the first of nations, you to whom the house of Israel come!
2 Go over to Calneh and see, and from there to great Hamath, and down to Philistine Gath.
Superior to these nations, or is their territory greater than yours?
3 you that chase a dull day and bring on an outrage-party!
4 men that lie on ivory couches and sprawl on their divans, and eat he-lambs out of flocks and calves from the middle of a fattening-pen,
5 that make verses to the harp, like David have contrived instruments of their own for accompaniment,
6 that drink temple-bowls of wine and anoint themselves with prime oils, and are not put out of health by Joseph’s collapse.
7 So they shall now be deported at the head of deportees, and sprawlers’ wakes shall pass away;
8 Jehovah has sworn by himself.
Quoth Jehovah the God of Armies, I abominate Jacob’s pride and hate his palaces, and will hand over city and contents.
9 And if there are left ten men in one house they shall die.
10 And his uncle and his burner shall take him up, carrying bones out of the house, and say to the one that was in the back of the house “Have you anyone else here?” and he shall say “Nobody,” and he shall say “Hush,” because Jehovah is not to be mentioned.
11 For here is Jehovah giving the order and they are to knock the big house to shivers and the little house to breaks.
12 Do horses run on cliffs or do cattle plow in them, that you have turned justice to opium and the fruit of right to wormwood,
13 you that are gay over what is not an occasion, that say “Haven’t we got ourselves horns by our strength?”
14 For here I am raising up against you, house of Israel, a nation that will oppress you from Lebo-Hamath to Rift Valley Arroyo.
7 Thus the Lord Jehovah showed me: there was he shaping young grasshoppers when the spring growth was starting, and there came full-grown grasshoppers after the king’s clipping.
2 They were finishing eating the herbage on the ground when I said “Lord Jehovah, forgive! how is Jacob to stand, when he is so little?” 3 Jehovah repented of this: “It shall not happen,” said Jehovah.
4 Thus the Lord Jehovah showed me: there was the Lord Jehovah challenging to a contest by fire.
And it devoured the great deep and was devouring all nature, 5 and I said “Lord Jehovah, let be! how is Jacob to stand, when he is so little?” 6 Jehovah repented of this: “It shall not happen either,” said the Lord Jehovah.
7 Thus he showed me: there the Lord had taken his stand by a plumb-line wall, plumb-line in hand.
8 And Jehovah said to me “What do you see, ʽAmos?” and I said “A plumb-line.”
And the Lord said “Here I am hanging a plumb-line among my people Israel: I will not go on passing them by anymore.
9 And Isaac’s heights shall be desolated and Israel’s sanctuaries laid waste, and I will stand up against Jeroboam’s house with the sword.”
10 And Priest Amasiah of Bethel sent word to King Jeroboam of Israel “ʽAmos has been organizing for a revolution against you among the house of Israel; there is not room in the country for all his talk;
11 for ʽAmos has been saying ‘Jeroboam shall die by the sword and Israel shall depart deported from its soil.’”
12 And Amasiah said to ʽAmos “Be going, seer, get safe away to Judah and eat bread there, and there you may prophesy; 13 but at Bethel you are not to go on prophesying anymore, because it is a royal sanctuary and it is a state building.”
14 And ʽAmos answered Amasiah “I am not a prophet and I am not a member of their fellowship, for I am a sheep man and a sycamore-nipper;
15 but Jehovah took me from behind the sheep, and Jehovah said to me ‘Go prophesy to my people Israel.’ 16 Now listen to Jehovah’s word: you say ‘You are not to prophesy about Israel nor pour out revelations about Isaac’s house’;
17 so Jehovah says, Your wife shall become a prostitute in the city, and your sons and daughters shall fall by the sword, and your land shall be divided by measure, and you yourself shall die on unclean soil; and Israel shall depart deported from its soil.”
8:1-14
8 Thus the Lord Jehovah showed me: there was a basket of fruit.
2 And he said to me “What do you see, ʽAmos?” and I said “A basket of fruit.”
And Jehovah said to me “The end has come to my people Israel: I will not go on passing them by anymore.”
3 And palace songs shall howl on that day, quoth the Lord Jehovah; we are tired of corpses, they are tossed in every place hush!
4 Listen to this, you that gulp at a poor man’s cattle and at the sheep of the most wretched men of a country,
5 saying “When will the new moon be over so we can sell foodstuffs, and the sabbath, so we can open up grain, using small bushel and big shekel and juggling a cheating pair of scales,
6 buying needy men for money and a poor man for sandals, and sell the refuse grain?”
7 Jehovah has sworn by Jacob’s pride “I will never forget all your doings.”
8 For all this shall not the earth quiver and have all who live on it mourn, and all of it go up like the Nile and sink down like the Nile of Egypt?
9 And on that day, quoth the Lord Jehovah, I will make the sun set at noon and darken the earth in broad day,
10 and I will turn your feasts to mourning and all your songs to dirge, and place a sackcloth on every waist and baldness on every head, and make it like mourning for an only son and the last of it like a bitter day.
11 Here are days coming, quoth the Lord Jehovah, when I will send a famine in the country, not hunger for bread nor thirst for water but for hearing Jehovah’s word,
12 and they shall tramp from sea to sea and straggle from north to east looking for Jehovah’s word and not finding it.
13 On that day the beautiful maidens and the young men will swoon with thirst,
14 those that swear by the Guilt of Samaria and say “by your God, Dan” and “by the Beer-Shebaʽ road,” and they will fall and rise no more.
9 I saw the Lord where he had taken his stand by the altar, and he said “Strike the pillar-head and let the ceiling shake, knock them off on the heads of them all, and the last of them I will kill with the sword: they shall not have a fugitive run away nor a refugee get to safety.
2 If they break into the world of the dead, from there my hand shall take them; and if they go up in the sky, from there I will bring them down;
3 and if they hide in the top of Carmel, from there I will hunt them out and take them; and if they conceal themselves away from my eyes on the floor of the sea, from there I will commission the snake and have it bite them;
4 and if they go into foreign slavery under their enemies, from there I will commission the sword and have it kill them; and I will fasten my eyes on them for mischief and not for good.”
5 But the Lord Jehovah of Armies who touches the earth and it surges and all who live on it mourn, and it all goes up like the Nile and sinks down like the Nile of Egypt,
6 who builds his stairways in the sky and founds his pyramid on earth, who calls the water of the sea and pours it over the face of the earth his name is Jehovah.
7 Are you not the same as sons of the Negro race to me, sons of Israel? quoth Jehovah.
Did I not bring up the Israelites from Egypt and the Philistines from Caphtor and the Syrians from Kir?
8 Here Jehovah’s eyes are on the sinful realm, and I will root it out from the face of the ground; I will not downright root out the house of Jacob, though, quoth Jehovah.
9 For here I am giving the command and I will tumble the house of Israel among all the nations like the tumbling in a sieve, and not a pebble shall fall on the ground.
10 By the sword shall all the sinners in my people die, those who say “Mischief will not overtake us nor cross our path.”
11 On that day I will set up David’s fallen booth and mend what of it was burst and set up what of it was knocked down and build it as of old,
12 in order that those who wear my name may take possession of the remnant of Edom and all the nations, quoth Jehovah who is doing this.
13 Here are days coming, quoth Jehovah, when a plower shall overtake the reaper and a wine-treader the seed-sower, and the mountains shall drip pomegranate-wine and all the hills shall ripple;
14 and I will come back to my people Israel, and they shall rebuild cities that lie waste and shall live there, and set out vineyards and drink the wine from them, and make gardens and eat their fruit.
15 And I will plant them in their own soil, and they shall not again be uprooted from their soil that I gave them, says your God Jehovah.
Obadiah
1 The vision of ʽObadiah.
Says the Lord Jehovah for Edom, We have heard a report from Jehovah, and a courier has been sent among the nations, “Up, let us stand up against her for war.”
2 Here, I have made you little among the nations; greatly despised you are.
3 Your self-confidence has deluded you, perched in the crannies of the cliffs with your lodgment on the towering heights, that say to yourself “Who will bring me down to earth?”
4 If you go high as the vulture and have your nest set between the stars, from there I will bring you down, quoth Jehovah.
5 If thieves came to you, if night marauders how you are blotted out! would they not steal what they had occasion for? if grape-gatherers came to you would they not leave after-pickings?
6 How ʽEsau is hunted out, his coverts pried into!
7 All the men you had treaties with have sent you to the boundary; the men who were at peace with you have deluded you, overpowered you; they have laid your bread as a trap for you; he has no sense in him.
8 Shall I not on that day, quoth Jehovah, do away with wise men in Edom and good judgment in ʽEsau’s highland?
9 and your champions shall be dismayed, Teman, so that ʽEsau’s highland shall be without a man by carnage.
10 For the outrage to your brother Jacob shame shall cover you and you shall be done away with forever:
11 in the day when you stood by, in the day when strangers were carrying off his strength and foreigners had come into his gate and were casting lots over Jerusalem, you too were like one of them.
12 And do not gloat over your brother’s day on his day of mishap; and do not rejoice for the sons of Judah on the day they are perishing; and do not talk jauntily on a day of distress;
13 do not go into my people’s gate on their day of calamity, do not be another to gloat over his ills on his day of calamity, and do not put your hand to his wealth on his day of calamity;
14 and do not stand in ambush to cut off those of his who are escaping; and do not in a day of distress hand his survivors over to their fate.
15 For Jehovah’s day is near upon all the nations: as you have done you shall be done by; your dealings shall come back on your own head.
16 For as you have drunk on my sacred highland all the nations shall drink all the time, drink and talk at random and be as if they never had been;
17 but on Mount Sion there shall be escape, and it shall be sacred, and the house of Jacob shall dispossess their dispossessors.
18 And the house of Jacob shall be fire and the house of Joseph become flame, and the house of ʽEsau become stubble; and they shall catch to them and eat them up, and the house of ʽEsau shall have no survivor, because Jehovah has spoken.
19 And they shall take possession of the South, ʽEsau’s highland, and the lowlands, the Philistines; and they shall take possession of the countryside of Ephraim and the countryside of Samaria, and Benjamin Gilead.
20 And the deported population of Halah (this is for the sons of Israel) shall dispossess the Canaanites to Sarephath, and the deported Jerusalemites in Asia Minor shall take possession of the cities of the South.
21 And saviors shall come up into Mount Sion to do justice on ʽEsau’s highland; and the empire shall be Jehovah’s.
Jonah
1 And Jehovah’s word came to Jonah the son of Amittai, 2 “Go off to the great city Nineveh and preach against it, because its wickedness has come up before me”;
3 and Jonah stood up to get away to Spain out of Jehovah’s presence, and went down to Joppa and found a ship sailing for Spain, and paid his fare and went aboard to sail with them to Spain out of Jehovah’s presence.
4 But Jehovah launched a great wind over the sea, and there came very rough weather on the sea, and the ship was ready to be wrecked;
5 and the sailors were afraid, and each cried to his god, and flung into the sea the things they had in the ship, to have it be easier on them; but Jonah had gone down into the hold and lain down and was fast asleep.
6 And the captain came where he was and said to him “What are you about, fast asleep? get up and call out to your god, maybe the god will have some consideration for us and we shall not be lost.”
7 And they said to each other “Come on, let us cast lots and know on whose account we are having this bad luck”; and they cast lots, and the lot fell on Jonah.
8 And they said to him “Please tell us what errand you are on and where you are going from, what country you are from and what people you belong to.”
9 And he said to them “I am a Hebrew, and revere Jehovah, the god of the heavens, who made the sea and the land.”
10 And the men were in great fear, and said to him “What is this you have done?” because the men knew he was trying to get away out of Jehovah’s presence, because he had told them.
11 And they said to him “What are we to do to you to have the sea calm down?” because the sea was getting stormier and stormier.
12 And he said to them “Pick me up and fling me into the sea to have the sea calm down; for I know it is on my account you are having this great storm.” 13 And the men rowed to get back to land, but could not, because the sea was getting stormier and stormier against them.
14 And they called out to Jehovah “Please, Jehovah, may we not perish for this man’s life, and do not charge us with shedding innocent blood, because you, Jehovah, did as you preferred”;
15 and they picked Jonah up and flung him into the sea, and the sea stopped raging.
16 And the men conceived a great fear of Jehovah, and made a sacrifice to Jehovah and made vows.
17 And Jehovah provided a great fish to swallow Jonah; and Jonah was in the fish’s stomach three days and three nights.
2:1-10
2 And Jonah prayed to his God Jehovah from the fish’s stomach,
2 and said “I called out of my distress to Jehovah, and he answered me; out of the heart of the realm of death I shouted; you heard my voice.
3 And you threw me in the ooze in ocean’s abyss, a river enclosing me; all your surges and waves passed over me;
4 And I thought ‘I am banished from before your eyes, how am I anymore to look to your holy temple?’
5 Water enveloped me choking off my life, the deep enclosed me, weeds were wrapped round my head.
6 To the sockets of mountains I went down, the earth had its bars over me forever; And you brought up my life from dissolution,Jehovah, my God.
7 When my soul failed me I remembered Jehovah, and my prayer went in to him in his holy temple.
8 Those who attend to futile superstitions are leaving their help,
9 but I with voice of thanksgiving will sacrifice to you,what I have vowed I will pay as salvation-offering to Jehovah.”
10 And Jehovah told the fish what to do, and it vomited Jonah out to the land.
3:1-10
3 And Jehovah’s word came to Jonah a second time 2 “Go off to the great city Nineveh and preach to it what I dictate to you”;
3 and Jonah went off to Nineveh in accordance with Jehovah’s word.
And Nineveh was a stupendously great city, a three days’ walk;
4 and Jonah began going into the city, going one day’s walk in, and preached “Forty days more and Nineveh is overthrown.”
5 And the men of Nineveh believed God and proclaimed a fast and put on sackcloths, from the greatest to the least of them;
6 and the word reached the king of Nineveh, and he stood up off his throne and laid off his grandeur and covered himself with a sackcloth and sat on the ashes,
7 and had proclamation made in Nineveh by authority of the king and his magnates “Let man and beast, cattle and sheep, not taste anything, not be pastured, and not drink water,
8 and cover themselves with sackcloths, man and beast, and call out loudly to God, and turn back from their wicked ways and from their ill-gotten gains;
9 who knows but God will turn back and repent, and desist from his anger, and we shall not perish?”
10 And God saw their actions, that they turned back from their wicked ways, and God repented of the evil he had threatened to do to them, and did not do it.
4 And Jonah took it very hard and was angry,
2 and prayed to Jehovah “Now, Jehovah, was not this what I said while I was still on my own soil? that was why I tried to head it off by getting away to Spain, because I knew you were a deity kindly and tenderhearted, patient and very friendly, and would repent of the evil.
3 And now, Jehovah, take my life away, because it is better I should die than live.”
4 And Jehovah said “Thoroughly angry, are you?”
5 And Jonah went out of the city and established himself out in front of the city, and made himself a booth there and sat down in the shade under it till he should see what would happen to the city.
6 And Jehovah provided a gourd vine, and it came up over Jonah to be a shade over his head, to free him from his trouble; and Jonah was very glad for the vine.
7 And Jehovah God prepared a worm at daybreak the next day, which attacked the vine and it dried up;
8 and when the sun rose God prepared a scorching east wind, and the sun struck on Jonah’s head, and he collapsed and asked for death and said “it is better I should die than live.”
9 And God said to Jonah “Thoroughly angry about the gourd vine, are you?” and he said “I am thoroughly angry, fit to die.”
10 And Jehovah said “You feel benevolent toward the vine, which you had not worked on nor raised, a one-night growth and a one-night loss;
11 and was I not to feel benevolent toward the great city Nineveh, in which there are more than a hundred and twenty thousand human beings that do not know their right hand from their left, and many beasts?”
Micah
1 Jehovah’s word which came to Micah the Morashtite in the times of Kings Jotham, Ahaz, Hezekiah, of Judah, which he beheld against Samaria and Jerusalem.
2 Listen, all peoples; give attention, earth and what it holds; and let Jehovah be witness against you, the Lord out of his holy temple.
3 For here is Jehovah coming out of his place and coming down and treading on earth’s heights;
4 and the mountains shall melt down under him and the vales shall split, like wax before a fire, like water spilled on a slope.
5 For Jacob’s crime is all this, and for the sins of the house of Israel.
Who is Jacob’s crime? is not Samaria? and who is Judah’s heights? is not Jerusalem?
6 And I will make of Samaria a ruin in the open country, a place to plant vineyards, and spill her stones into the valley and uncover her foundations.
7 And all her carvings shall be smashed, and all her tips burned down, and all her idols I will reduce to a desolation, because out of a prostitute’s tips they were gathered and to a prostitute’s tips they shall go back.
8 For this I will wail and howl, go stripped and naked; I will make a wailing like the jackals and a mourning like the ostriches,
9 because her wound is desperate, for it goes in to Judah, it reaches my people’s gate, Jerusalem.
10 Do not weep; at Beth-le-ʽAphrah I have daubed myself with earth.
11 Pass, dame of Shaphir, in the shame of nakedness; Saanan’s dame is not left out; the wail at Beth-ha-Esel takes its starting-point from you.
12 For the dame of Maroth has waited for good, when evil had come down from Jehovah to the gate of Jerusalem.
13 Hitch up the blood-horse to the chariot, dame of Lakish; she was the beginning of sin for the daughter of Sion, because in you were discovered the crimes of Israel.
14 So you shall give good-bye gifts to Moresheth-Gath.
The houses of Aczib are a disappointment to the kings of Israel.
15 I will yet bring you your possessor, dame of Mareshah; to ʽAdullam shall Israel’s glory come.
16 Go bald and shorn for your delicate children, extend your baldness like a vulture, because they are deported from you.
2:1-13
2 Ha, they who plot villainy and commit mischief on their beds, and when morning light comes they do it because they have the ability!
2 and they desire fields and steal them, houses and carry them off, and victimize husband and house, man and estate.
3 So Jehovah says, Here I am for this clan a misfortune from which you shall not extricate your necks, and you shall not go upliftedly, because it is a bad time.
4 On that day they shall strike up a lay about you and lament a lamentable lament “Ravaged are we; he changes off my people’s portion; how it shifts away from me! to those who carry us off as slaves he divides our lands.”
5 So there shall be no one of yours who measures a line by lot in Jehovah’s assembly.
6 “Do not preach!”
Preach or not preach, for these disgrace will not fall back.
7 Is the house of Jacob cursed?
Has Jehovah grown impatient or are these his doings?
Do not my words deal kindly with him who walks right?
8 But of late my people is standing up as an enemy; you strip off robe, cloak, mantle from unsuspicious passersby as if by law of war.
9 The women of my people you expel from their dainty houses; you take my adornment forever off from their little children.
10 Be off, for this is not the resting-place; owing to uncleanness you will be smitten with a baleful ruin.
11 If a man running a course of wind and falsehood should say lyingly “I will preach wine and beer to you” he would be the preacher for this people.
12 I will collect all Jacob, I will gather the remnant of Israel; I will put them together like sheep in a pen, they shall be a thronging mass of humanity like a flock in the middle of a corral.
13 The burster has gone up before them; they have burst it, they have trodden out a gate and gone out by it, and their king has gone on before them and Jehovah at their head.
3:1-12
3 And I said “Listen, heads of Jacob and chieftains of the house of Israel: is it not your business to know justice?
2 haters of good and lovers of evil, eaters of my people’s flesh that have stripped their skin off them and cracked up their bones
3 and carved them as if in a kettle, like meat contained in a caldron.
4 Then they will cry to Jehovah, and he will not answer them but will veil his face from them at that time because they have taken to vicious practices.
5 Says Jehovah about the prophets that mislead my people, that bite with their teeth and proclaim peace, and against him who does not put something in their mouths they declare a war:
6 Therefore you shall have night cutting off vision and darkness cutting off soothsaying, and the sun shall go down on the prophets and the day turn black over them,
7 and the seers shall be disappointed and the soothsayers abashed, and they shall all veil their lips, because there is no answer from God.
8 But I am full of strength and decision and vigor to tell Jacob his crime and Israel his sin.
9 Listen to this, heads of the house of Jacob and chieftains of the house of Israel, that detest justice and put kinks in whatever is straight,
10 that build Sion by bloodshed and Jerusalem by foul play
11 her heads give the decision they are bribed to, and her priests the rulings they are hired to, and her prophets the predictions they get money for, and they lean on Jehovah and say “Do we not have Jehovah in our midst? no mischief will come upon us.”
12 So on your account Sion shall be plowed for field land, and Jerusalem shall be ruins and the Temple Mount a height of broken rocks and scrub trees.
4 And in the future days the mountain of Jehovah’s house shall be set at the head of the mountains, lifted above hills, and peoples shall stream to it.
2 And many nations shall go and say “Come and let us go up to Jehovah’s mountain, to the house of the God of Jacob, to have him instruct us in ways of his that we may go in his paths,” because from Sion instruction shall go out and Jehovah’s word from Jerusalem.
3 And he shall give judgment between many peoples and pronounce verdicts for numerous nations to a great distance, and they shall pound their swords into hoes and their spears into pruninghooks; nation shall not take up sword against nation, and they shall never again learn war.
4 And they shall sit each man under his grapevine or his fig-tree with no one to alarm them, for the mouth of Jehovah of Armies has promised it;
5 because all the peoples go every man in the name of his own god, but we go in the name of our God Jehovah forever and ever.
6 On that day, quoth Jehovah, I will bring in what was breaking down and bring together what was straying and what I had hurt,
7 and make what was breaking down into a remnant and what was ailing into a strong nation, and Jehovah shall be king over them on Mount Sion thenceforth forever.
8 And you, Migdal-ʽEder, castle hill of the daughter of Sion, to you shall come the first dominion, a kingdom for the daughter of Jerusalem.
9 Now why are you raising a shout? have you no king in you, or is your counselor lost, that pangs like those of a woman in childbirth have seized you?
10 Be in pangs and burst out, daughter of Sion, like a woman in childbirth, for now you are to go out of town and find quarters in the fields, and come to Babylon: there you shall be rescued, there Jehovah will bring you off out of your enemies’ hands.
11 And now many nations have come together against you, those that say “Let her be polluted and let us gloat over Sion,”
12 not knowing Jehovah’s ideas nor understanding his plan, that he has gathered them like sheaves to a threshing-floor;
13 stand up and thresh, daughter of Sion, for I will make your horns iron and your hoofs I will make bronze, and you shall batter many peoples to powder and devote the winnings from them to Jehovah and their wealth to the Lord of all the earth.
5 Now let the daughter of Gedor fence herself, they have laid siege to us; with a rod they will beat the judge of Israel on the Jawbone.
2 And you, Beth-Ephratha, tiniest among the thousand of Judah, out of you shall come one to be ruler in Israel, his origins being from of old, from ancient days.
3 So he will give them up till the time that one has borne a child.
And the rest of his brothers shall come back to the sons of Israel.
4 And he shall stand and shepherd in Jehovah’s might and in the pride of the name of his God Jehovah; and they shall be settled, for then shall he be great to the ends of the earth.
5 (And this shall be peace: when Assyria comes into our country and treads on our soil, we shall set up against him seven shepherds and eight dukes of men,
6 and they will shepherd Assyria’s country with swords and Nimrod’s country with falchions.)
And he shall deliver us from Assyria when it comes into our country and treads on our territory.
7 And in the midst of many peoples the remnant of Jacob shall be like dew from Jehovah, like showers on herbage, that does not await a man nor stand waiting for human beings; and among the nations,
8 in the midst of many peoples, the remnant of Jacob shall be like a lion among game in the badlands, like a two-year-old lion among flocks of sheep, which, if it passes, pounces and makes its kill and nobody can rescue.
9 Your hand shall go high over your foes, and all your enemies shall be extirpated.
10 And on that day, quoth Jehovah, I will extirpate your ponies from your midst and destroy your chariots,
11 and extirpate the cities of your country and demolish your fortresses,
12 and I will extirpate the witchcraft you ply and you shall have no fortune-tellers,
13 and I will extirpate your carvings and obelisks out of your midst and you shall no longer do reverence to the work of your hands,
14 and I will uproot your asherahs out of your midst and stamp out your idols.
15 And in anger and resentment I will take vengeance on all the nations that have not listened.
6:1-16
6 Listen to what Jehovah is saying: “Stand up, upbraid the mountains and let the hills hear your voice.
2 Listen, mountains, to Jehovah’s upbraiding, and give ear, foundations of earth, because Jehovah has a case against his people and is having it out with Israel.
3 My people, what have I done to you and how have I overtasked you? testify against me.
4 For I brought you up out of Egypt and ransomed you out of the slave-quarters, and sent before you Moses, Aaron, and Miriam.
5 My people, remember what King Balak of Moab proposed and what answer Balaam the son of Be’or gave him, and from the Acacias to the Gilgal, in order to know Jehovah’s loyal work.” 6 With what shall I advance to Jehovah, pay homage to the transcendent God? shall I advance to him with burnt-offerings, with yearling calves?
7 will Jehovah accept thousands of rams, millions of rivers of oil? shall I give my eldest son for my crime, the fruit of my wife for the sin of my soul?
8 He has told you, man, what is good; and what does Jehovah demand from you but to do justice and love friendliness and walk sanely with your God?
9 Hark, it is Jehovah’s voice as he calls out to the city and sets forth good sense, saying “Listen, tribe and meeting of the city:
10 am I to forget the wrong-doer’s house, ill-gotten hoards and a detestable short bushel?
11 am I to clear him for wrongful scales and a bag of cheating weights?
12 city whose rich men are full of outrage and its inhabitants talk falsehoods and the tongues in their mouths are all disloyalty!
13 And I on my part have dealt you devastatingly prostrating blows for your sins.
14 You are to eat and not have your hunger satisfied, and it will give you the colic; and to displace and not bring safe off, and what you do bring off I will give to the sword.
15 You are to sow and not reap; you are to tread olives and not rub yourself with oil, and grape-juice and not drink wine.
16 And you observe ʽOmri’s usages and every fabrication of Ahab’s house, and go by their plans, so as to have me make you a desolation and its inhabitants a whistling, and have you bear the taunts of peoples.”
7:1-20
7 Woe is me, for I am like fruit-harvest time, like after-picking time in the vintage: there is no cluster to eat, I hanker after a rare-ripe fig.
2 Godly men are lost from the earth, and there is not an upright person among mankind; they are all watching their chance for bloodshed, they are each trying to get his brother in a net.
3 They have put their hands in good shape for bad work; the general is soliciting and the judge is acting for a consideration, and the great man is asserting his own personal desire,
4 and they twist the good into the tangle like bushes too straight for a hedge.
On the day of your lookouts your punishment is coming; now will be their bewilderment.
5 Do not trust a friend, do not rely on a chum, guard the frontier of your mouth against the mate that rests in your arms;
6 for son cheapens father, daughter stands up against mother, daughter-in-law against mother-in-law, a man’s enemies are the men of his house.
7 But I will watch for Jehovah, wait for the God of my salvation; my God will hear me.
8 Do not be glad for me, enemy; when I fall I get up, when I sit in the dark Jehovah gives me light.
9 I will bear Jehovah’s displeasure, because I have sinned against him, till he champions my rights and does justice for me.
He will bring me out to the light; I shall feast my eyes on his loyal work,
10 and my enemy shall see it and shame shall cover her, she who is saying to me “Where is your God Jehovah?”
My eyes shall see her fate; now she shall become a trampled thing like street mud.
11 There is a day for building your fences; that day limits shall be far off;
12 that is a day when your gems shall come in, from Assyria to Egypt and from Egypt to the River;
13 and the earth shall become a desolation on account of its inhabitants, out of the fruit of their practices.
14 Pasture your people with your staff, the sheep that are your estate, dwellers in the solitude of the bush, in the midst of Carmel; let them pasture Bashan and Gilead as in days of yore;
15 as in the days of your coming out of Egypt show us wonders.
16 Let nations see and be ashamed of all their might; let them lay hand on mouth, let their ears be dumb.
17 Let them lick dust like a snake, like crawlers of the earth let them wriggle out of their coverts; to our God Jehovah let them come in dread, and be afraid of you.
18 Who is a deity like you, pardoning guilt and passing over crime for the remnant of his estate, not holding his anger forever, because he takes pleasure in friendliness;
19 coming back to his tenderness for us, conquering our guilt?
You will throw all our sins into the oozy deeps of the sea,
20 you will accord to Jacob the loyalty, to Abraham the friendship, that you swore to our fathers from of old.
Nahum
1 The boding for Nineveh; the book of the vision of Nahum the Elkoshite.
2 Jehovah is a jealous deity and takes revenge; Jehovah takes revenge and is fierce in temper; Jehovah takes revenge on his foes and bears his enemies in mind.
3 Jehovah is patient and powerful, and Jehovah does not acquit an offender.
His walk is in gale and tempest, and clouds are the dust of his feet;
4 He speaks sternly to the sea and dries it out, and dries off all the rivers; Bashan wilts, and Carmel, and the young leafage of Lebanon stands forlorn.
5 The mountains quake at him, and the hills surge, And the earth is in commotion before him, the world and all who inhabit it.
6 Before his hostility who may stand, and who stand up amid the heat of his anger?
His choler is like a stream of fire, and the rocks break down before him.
7 Jehovah is good for a citadel in the day of distress; Jehovah knows those who take refuge in him,
8 and carries them through cloudbursts.
He makes a finish of those who stand up against him, and chases his enemies into darkness.
9 What do you plan against Jehovah? he is making a finish;distress will not stand up twice;
10 for even briers matted in a tangle, and soaked as they can be, will be eaten up like stubble fully dry.
11 Out of you came one who planned mischief against Jehovah, who proposed a vicious policy.
12 Says Jehovah, If waters gush out and rage withal, so do they subside and pass off; I did grind you down, I will not again.
13 And now I will break his yoke-bow off from you and snap your tether.
14 And Jehovah will give a commission against you: there shall not again be any of your name engendered; out of the house of your gods I will eradicate carving and casting; I will make your grave a dunghill.
15 There on the mountains are the feet of a messenger of good news, a herald of peace: celebrate your feasts, Judah, pay your vows, for never again shall the reprobates pass through you, they are done with, they are extinct.
2 A hammer has come in your face: mount guard, keep a lookout on roads, brace waists, rally strength to the utmost.
2 For Jehovah has brought back Jacob’s pride like Israel’s, because riflers had rifled them and had wrecked their branches.
3 His champions’ shields are reddened, stalwart men in scarlet; steel was softened in fire on the day of his making ready, and cypresses were made to reel.
4 In the open the chariots are running wild, they are hurtling through the suburbs; their look is like torches, they shoot along like lightning-flashes.
5 He remembers his heroes; they stumble in their going; they hurry to the wall and the barricade is got ready.
6 The river gates are opened and the palace collapses,
7 and madame is made to stand exposed, with her slave-girls droning like pigeons’ notes, drumming on their chests.
8 And Nineveh is like a reservoir of water with its water running out; “stop, stop,” but no one turns his face.
9 Plunder silver, plunder gold, and there is no end of the supply, fortunes in every kind of choice article.
10 Clearing out, cleaning out, clawing out, and hearts melting down and knees giving way and cramps in all backs, and all their faces are contorted.
11 Where is the lions’ lair, that was feeding-place for the two-year-olds, where walked lion, lioness, lion’s cub with no one to alarm it?
12 the lion tore up as much as his cubs wanted and broke necks for his lionesses, and filled his holes with prey and his lairs with carcasses.
13 Have at you, quoth Jehovah of Armies!
I will smoke out your thicket, and swords shall eat up your two-year-olds, and I will rid earth of your kills, and the sound of your roar shall not be heard again.
3 Ha, bloody city, all trickery, full of prey, never without a kill!
2 Hark, a sound of whips, a sound of wheels jarring, and galloping ponies and jumping chariot!
3 rearing horse and flame of sword and lightning of spear and multitudes of dying and masses of corpses; there is no end of the bodies, they stumble on the bodies,
4 for the multitudinous debaucheries of the handsome prostitute, mistress of witchcraft, who blotted out nations with her debaucheries and clans with her witchcraft.
5 Have at you, quoth Jehovah!
I will turn your skirts up over your face and let nations see your nakedness and clans your ignominy,
6 and I will throw carrion over you and make you an object of disdain and a spectacle.
7 And everyone that sees you shall make off, and say “Nineveh is smitten! who is to lament her? where shall I look for comforters for you?”
8 Are you to be better than Amon’s Thebes, seated on the branching Nile with water around her, whose wall was a bulwark of sea, consisted of sea;
9 whose forces the Nubians were, and the Egyptians, no end of them; whose auxiliaries were Put and the Libyans?
10 She too went to slavery in exile; she too had children’s brains dashed out at every street-end, and over her aristocrats they threw lots and all her great men were chained in fetters.
11 You too shall overdrink and be stupefied; you too shall hunt for a refuge from an enemy.
12 All your fortresses are trees with rareripe figs, if they are shaken they drop into an eater’s mouth;
13 you find your people women in you; the gates of your country are thrown open to your enemies, fire has consumed your bars.
14 Draw yourself water for a siege; strengthen your fortresses; get into the mud and trample clay, handle a brick-mold;
15 there fire will consume you, swords will make an end of you, they will eat you up like marching grasshoppers.
16 Come on in masses like marching grasshoppers, come on in masses like flying grasshoppers; you have drawn more traders than there are stars in the sky the hoppers cast their skins and take wing.
17 Your policemen are like grasshoppers and your clerks like young grasshoppers that camp in the hedges on a cold day; the sun is up and off they go, and there is no knowing what place they were in.
18 Your shepherds are drowsy, king of Assyria, your heroes are asleep; your people are scattered over the mountains with no one to draw them together.
19 There is no healing for your broken bones; your wound is gangrened; all who hear about you will clap their hands over you for over whom has not your vileness taken its course continually?
Habakkuk
1 The boding that the prophet Hambakuk beheld.
2 How long, Jehovah, shall I have been clamoring and you not listen, shall I cry foul play and you not interfere?
3 why do you show me villainy and look on at mischief, and I am confronted with rapine and outrage, and disputes break out and raise quarrels?
4 Therefore religion is numbed, and justice comes out nevermore, because a criminal brings numbers against the one who has right on his side and therefore justice comes out on the wrong track.
5 See among the nations, look, be mystified, be mazed: for he is doing a deed in your days that you will not believe when it is told;
6 for here he is setting in motion the Chaldeans, the truculent and hasty nation that goes through the length and breadth of earth to take possession of abodes that do not belong to it.
7 It is terrible and formidable; it looks to itself for its laws and its standing;
8 and its ponies are swifter than leopards and brisker than evening wolves, and its horsemen come from far, they fly.
Like vultures hurrying to eat,
9 it all comes for outrage; their massed faces are toward the east; and it has gathered up slaves like the sand,
10 while it gibes at kings and takes potentates for its butt; it laughs at every fortification and has piled up earth and taken it,
11 then taken breath and passed on, and made this strength of its own its god.
12 Are you not from of old, Jehovah?
God of my devotion, you will not die.
Jehovah, you established him for judgment and planted him as a rock for correction.
13 Why should you, too clean-eyed to see wickedness and unable to look at mischief, look on at faithless men, lie still while a rascal chews up a more honest man,
14 and have made mankind like fish in the sea, like insects without a government?
15 he brings them all up with a hook, hauls them in in his net, gathers them in his seine.
Therefore he is glad and gay;
16 therefore he sacrifices to his net and burns incense to his seine, because by those his takings are fat and his diet rich;
17 is he therefore to empty his net and be always killing nations unsparingly?
2 I will stand at my post and station myself on guard and be on the lookout to see what he will say by me and what response I shall make to my reproach.
2 And Jehovah answered me and said “Write a vision and set it forth clearly on the tablets to be read swiftly;
3 for there is yet a vision for the date, to depose of the end, and it will not lie.
If it delays, wait for it; for come it will, and not be belated.”
4 Now in the timeserver he takes no satisfaction, but the honest man shall live by his steadfastness;
5 how much less shall a faithless brute be pleasing, a haughty man, who has distended his appetite like the grave, being like death insatiable, and has gathered in all the nations and swept up all the peoples!
6 Shall not all these strike up a lay of him and propound a satire on him, and say “Ha, you who amass for how long? what is not yours, and load yourself up with things you have taken in pawn!
7 Will not your creditors stand up suddenly and your worriers wake, and you be for their pillaging?
8 Because you have despoiled many nations, all the rest of the peoples shall despoil you, for bloodshed of men and outrage to earth, town and all who live in it.
9 “Ha, you who make hurtful winnings for your house, placing your nest aloft, to come off safe out of the clutch of disaster!
10 You have contrived shame for your house, maiming many peoples and letting your life be the forfeit;
11 for stones will cry out from walls, and joists out of woodwork will back them up.
12 “Ha, you who build a city by bloodshed and found a town by foul play!”
13 (Is not that from Jehovah of Armies?)
“And peoples toil to feed fire, and folk upon folk spends itself bootlessly.”
14 (For the earth shall be full of knowledge of Jehovah’s glory like water that covers a sea.)
15 “Ha, you who have your friend drink out of your bowl and your bag, and befuddle him too, in order to look at their nudity!
16 You are fuller loaded with ignominy than with glory; drink yourself and show off your uncircumcised body; the cup in Jehovah’s right hand shall come round to you, and shabbiness come over your glory.
17 For the outrage to Lebanon shall cover you, and the havoc of beasts shall dismay you, for bloodshed of men and outrage to earth, town and all who live in it.”
18 Of what use is a statue that its sculptor should have carved it, a bronze and a lying oracle that its modeler should have put his confidence in it, so as to make dumb trumperies?
19 Ha, you who say to wood “Wake up, stir yourself!” of silent stone “That will give instructions”!
There is that cased in gold and silver, with no soul within it.
20 But Jehovah is in his holy temple: silence before him, all the earth!
3 (A prayer of the prophet Hambakuk in dithyrambics.)
2 Jehovah, I have heard your story, have feared, Jehovah, at your dealing; As years draw on bring it to life, as years draw on making it known, fiercely remembering tenderness.
3 God is coming from Teman, the Holy from the highlands of Paran.
(Selah) His majesty covers the sky and the earth is full of his praise,
4 And there is under him a radiance like fire, he has beams of light at his side, and there is the hiding of his power.
5 Before him goes pestilence, and back of him firebolts go out.
6 He halts, and earth trembles; He sees, and nations flinch; And primeval mountains burst, immemorial hills stoop,
7 The packtrains of ‘Us are alarmed, the caravans of Ishbak are dismayed, The homes of Cushan are disquieted, the tents of the Midianite country.
8 Are you angry with the rivers, Jehovah, or is your wrath against the sea, That you are riding your ponies, your victory-bringing chariot,
9 With your bow stripped bare, your quiver crammed with shafts?
[Selah] Earth splits into rivers,
10 mountains have seen you, they writhe, Clouds pelt down water, the deep utters its voice, The sun forgets its lofty radiance,
11 the moon stands still in its lodge, At the light of your arrows as they go, at the radiant flash of your spear;
12 In hostility you tread earth, in anger you trample nations.
13 You have gone out for the succor of your people, to give victory to your anointed; You have shattered head from wicked man’s house, baring foundation to neck; (Selah)
14 You have pierced with his shafts the heads of his warriors coming tempestuously to scatter me, Their exultation as if to eat up a wretch in concealment.
15 You have trod your ponies in the sea the clay of great waters.
16 I heard, and my body quivered, my lips purred aloud; Decay comes into my bones, my insteps quiver under me, I moan at a day of distress to come for a nation that raids us.
17 For fig-trees are bearing no fruit and nothing grows on the grapevine, Olive-trees’ work is disappointing and terraces are making no food, Sheep have disappeared from fold and there are no cattle in the stalls.
18 But I will glory in Jehovah, I will exult in my God of salvation;
19 The Lord Jehovah is my vigor, and makes my feet like a wild doe’s and makes me tread the heights. (of the Director; with string accompaniment.)
Zephaniah
1 Jehovah’s word which came to Sephaniah the son of Cushi the son of Gedaliah the son of Amariah the son of Hezekiah in the time of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah.
2 I will take off everything off the face of the earth, quoth Jehovah:
3 I will take off man and beast, I will take off the birds of the air and the fish of the sea, and the stumbling-blocks with the wicked, and I will extirpate mankind off the face of the earth, quoth Jehovah.
4 And I will stretch out my hand over Judah and over all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and exterminate from this place the kin of the Baal and the kith of the komers,
5 and those who do reverence on the roof to the legions of the sky, and those who do reverence to Jehovah and swear by Malcam,
6 and those who fall back from following Jehovah and those who have not gone looking for Jehovah nor resorted to him.
7 Silence because of the Lord Jehovah, because Jehovah’s day is near; because Jehovah has prepared for a sacrifice, has hallowed his guests.
8 And on the day of Jehovah’s sacrifice I will punish the generals and the royal family and all that wear foreign clothing,
9 and I will punish on that day everyone who leaps over a threshold, those who fill their master’s house with outrage and fraud.
10 And on that day, quoth Jehovah, there shall be the sound of an outcry from the fish gate and a howling from the second quarter and a great crashing from the hills.
11 Howl, inhabitants of the hollow, because all the people of Canaan are cut off; all those who were laden with silver are exterminated.
12 And at that time I will search Jerusalem with lamps; and I will punish the men that are stiffened on their lees, that say to themselves “Jehovah will do no good and no harm.” 13 And their wealth shall be for pillage, and their houses become a desolation; and they shall build houses and not live there, and plant vineyards and not drink the wine of them.
14 Jehovah’s great day is near, near and speeding swiftly on; the sound of Jehovah’s day is bitter, a champion is yelling there.
15 That day is a day of wrath, a day of distress and hard straits, a day of blast and blight, a day of darkness and gloom, a day of cloud and thick air,
16 a day of horn-blowing and cheering against the fortified cities and against the high corner-towers.
17 And I will bring distress on men, and they shall go like blind men, because they have sinned against Jehovah; and their blood shall be spilled like dust, and their entrails like cow-droppings.
18 Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them on the day of Jehovah’s wrath; and by the fire of his jealousy all the country shall be consumed.
For he will dispatch all the inhabitants of the country in a finish full of sheer consternation.
2 Get in your straw, get in your straw, nation unabashed,
2 before you become like chaff blowing along, before the day of Jehovah’s anger comes upon you.
3 Go looking for Jehovah, all you humble of the earth, you who have put his law in practice; look out for honesty, for humility you may be screened on the day of Jehovah’s anger.
4 For Ghaza shall be abandoned, and Ashkelon become a desolation; Ashdod they shall oust at noon, and ‘Ekron shall be uprooted.
5 Ha, inhabitants of the seacoast strip, nation of the Cretans!
Jehovah’s word is against you, Canaan, country of the Philistines, and I will destroy you to the last inhabitant;
6 and the Cretan country shall be shepherds’ pastures and folds for sheep.
7 And the seacoast strip shall belong to the remnant of the house of Judah, they shall pasture on them, they shall have the flocks lie down at evening in the houses of Ashkelon, because their God Jehovah will take up their case and come back to them.
8 I have heard Moab’s taunts and the insults of the Bene-ʽAmmon, with which they have taunted my people and blustered against their territory.
9 So by my life, quoth Israel’s God Jehovah of Armies, Moab shall become like Sodom and the Bene-ʽAmmon like Ghomorrah, a place for brakes of weeds and for digging salt and a desolation forever; the remnant of my people shall plunder them, what is left of my nation shall fall heir to them;
10 this is what they get for their pride, for having taunted and blustered against the people of Jehovah of Armies.
11 Jehovah is terrible over them, because he has dwindled all the gods of the earth, and all the coasts of the nations shall do reverence to him each man at his own place.
12 You too, Nubians, are run through by Jehovah’s sword.
13 And he will stretch out his hand over the north and destroy Assyria and render Nineveh a dried-out desolation like the wilderness.
14 And flocks shall lie down in the middle of her, every beast of pasture; both barn-owl and porcupine shall lodge in the capitals of her columns; there is a great owl’s voice in the window, a raven’s on the threshold.
15 This is the hilarious city that was seated in security, that said to herself “There’s me and that’s all!” how she has become a desolation, a place for beasts to lie down! everyone who passes her shall whistle and wave his hand.
3:1-20
3 Alas, the disobedient and polluted one, the arbitrary city,
2 that obeyed no voice, learned nothing by discipline, had no confidence in Jehovah, would not come near her God!
3 her generals in her midst are roaring lions, her judges evening wolves that do no morning gnawing;
4 her prophets are reckless, faithless men, her priests treat sanctities as profane, they tamper with rulings.
5 Jehovah, a righteous one, is in her; he will do no foul play; morning by morning he brings his justice to the light, he does not default, he does not know how to play foul.
6 I made away with nations, their corner-towers are desolate, I laid their streets waste till there is not a passer, their cities are wrecked till there is not a man, to the last inhabitant;
7 I thought “It must be you will fear me, will let yourself learn, and she will not lose sight of all the visitations I have sent her”; in fact the first thing they did was to make all their practices vicious.
8 So wait for me, quoth Jehovah, for my day of standing up as witness; for it is my judgment to bring nations together, to gather kingdoms, to pour out my hostility on them, all the heat of my anger; for in the fire of my jealousy all the earth shall be consumed.
9 For then I will turn the lips of all the peoples clean, that they may all call on Jehovah’s name and cooperate in his service.
10 From beyond the African rivers the Pathrusites shall bring my aromas, my offering.
11 On that day you shall not be put to shame for all your practices in which you have been so rebellious against me: for then I will remove from among you your hilariously self-confident men, and they shall never again be pretentious in my holy mountain,
12 and I will leave among you a people in hardship and poverty, who shall take refuge in Jehovah’s name.
13 The remnant of Israel shall do no foul play and tell no lie, and a dishonest tongue shall not be found in their mouth.
For they shall pasture and lie down with no one to alarm them.
14 Shout, daughter of Sion; cheer, Israel; be heartily glad and gleeful, daughter of Jerusalem.
15 Jehovah has taken off all your judgments, has cleared away all your enemies; Jehovah is king in your midst, you shall not see trouble again.
16 On that day Jerusalem shall have it said to her “Do not be afraid, Sion, do not lose heart:
17 your God Jehovah is in your midst, a saving champion; he will blithely delight in you, will be quiet in his love, will jubilate over you with a shout.”
18 As on an anniversary day I bring together her smitten ones on the day of taking off taunting from her.
19 Here I will at that time be making an end of those who inflict hardships on you, and will save what was breaking down and gather together what was straying, and render them a praise and a name in every country of their shame.
20 At that time I will bring you, and at that time I will gather you together; for I will make you a name and a praise among all the peoples of the earth, when I come back to you before your eyes, says Jehovah.
Haggai
1 In the year two of King Darius, in the sixth month, on the first day of the month, Jehovah’s word came by the prophet Haggai to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshuaʽ the son of Jehosadak, the high priest:
2 “Says Jehovah of Armies, This people say ‘The time for Jehovah’s house to be built has not come yet.’”
3 And Jehovah’s word came by the prophet Haggai: 4 “Is it time for you yourselves to be living in your houses with wainscoting while this house lies in ruins? 5 Now Jehovah of Armies says, Pay attention to what you are about.
6 You have been sowing much and bringing in little, eating but not so as to have your fill, drinking but not so as to feel the effects, dressing but not so as to be warm, and the wage-earner earning into a pocket with a hole in it.
7 Says Jehovah of Armies, Pay attention to what you are about.
8 Go up to the mountain and bring wood and build the house and have me accept it and be an object of respect, says Jehovah.
9 Facing round toward a great deal and finding it turns out a little, bringing a crop into the house and finding I have blown on it what for? quoth Jehovah of Armies; on account of my house which is in ruins while you are each running for his own house;
10 that is why the sky has shut off dew and the ground has shut off its growth,
11 and I have called up a drought over the country and over the mountains, and over the grain and over the grapejuice and over the oil and over everything the soil puts out and over man and over beast and over all the hands have toiled for.”
12 And Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel and Joshuaʽ the son of Jehosadak, the high priest, and all the remnant of the people, obeyed their God Jehovah and listened to the words of the prophet
13 Haggai as their God Jehovah had sent him to them; and the people were afraid of Jehovah, but Jehovah’s messenger Haggai, on Jehovah’s mission, said to the people “I am with you, quoth Jehovah.”
14 And Jehovah stirred the spirit of Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and of Joshuaʽ the son of Jehosadak, the high priest, and of all the remnant of the people, and they came and did work on the house of their God Jehovah of Armies,
15 on the twenty-fourth day of the month in the sixth month.
2 In the year two of King Darius, in the seventh month, on the twenty-first of the month, Jehovah’s word came by the prophet Haggai: 2 “Say to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshuaʽ the son of Jehosadak, the high priest, and to the remnant of the people,
3 ‘Who is there among you of the older generation, one that saw this house in its former glory? and what do you see it now? does it not look to you the same as nothing?
4 But now be resolute, Zerubbabel, quoth Jehovah, and be resolute, High Priest Joshuaʽ son of Jehosadak, and be resolute, all people of the country, quoth Jehovah, and keep at work, for I am with you, quoth Jehovah of Armies,
5 and my spirit stands fast in your midst; do not be afraid.’
6 “For Jehovah of Armies says ‘One period more it is a little one and I am going to shake the sky and the earth, and the sea and the dry land;
7 and I will shake all the nations, and the choice things of all the nations shall come, and I will fill this house with glory, says Jehovah of Armies.
8 The silver is mine and the gold is mine, quoth Jehovah of Armies.
9 The future glory of this house shall be greater than the first, says Jehovah of Armies, and in this place I will make all well, quoth Jehovah of Armies.’”
10 On the twenty-fourth of the ninth month in the year two of Darius, Jehovah’s word came by the prophet Haggai
11 “Says Jehovah of Armies, Ask the priests for a ruling: 12 suppose a man carries consecrated flesh in the flap of his coat, and touches with his flap bread or vegetables or wine or oil or any eatable, will it become consecrated?”
And the priests answered “No.”
13 And Haggai said “If one who is unclean by a dead body touches any of these will it become unclean?”
And the priests answered “It will.”
14 And Haggai answered “So it is with this people and so with this nation before me, quoth Jehovah, and so with all the work of their hands and what they come near: it is unclean. 15 And now pay attention from this day on. When a stone had not yet been laid on a stone in Jehovah’s temple
16 how were you doing? coming to a heap good for twenty sacks and having it turn out ten, coming to the winepress to dip out fifty jars and having it turn out twenty; 17 I have struck you with blasting and mildew and hail, all the work of your hands, and you were not heading toward me, quoth Jehovah.
18 Pay attention from this day on, from the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, from the day that the foundation of Jehovah’s temple was laid; pay attention;
19 is the seed still in the barn? and the grapevine and the fig-tree and the pomegranate-tree have not set; from this day I will bless.”
20 And Jehovah’s word came a second time to Haggai on the twenty-fourth of the month, 21 “Say to Zerubbabel the governor of Judah ‘I am going to shake the sky and the earth,
22 and overturn imperial thrones and quell the force of the nations’ empires, and overturn chariots and their riders, and ponies and their riders shall go down by each other’s swords.
23 On that day, quoth Jehovah of Armies, I will take you, my servant Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, quoth Jehovah, and make you like a seal, for you I have chosen, quoth Jehovah of Armies.’”
Malachi
1 The boding of Jehovah’s word to Israel by Malaki.
2 I loved you, says Jehovah.
And you say “In what did you love us?”
Was not ʽEsau brother to Jacob? quoth Jehovah; and I loved Jacob,
3 and ʽEsau I hated and made a desolation of his mountains and wilderness pastures of his estate.
4 Whereas Edom says “We have had our houses wrecked, but we shall come back and rebuild the ruins,” Jehovah of Armies says “They will build, but I will demolish; and they will be called ‘Wrong Side Precinct’ and ‘the people to whom Jehovah is hostile forever’;
5 and your eyes will see it and you will say ‘Jehovah proves great beyond the boundary of Israel.’”
6 Son honors father, and servant his master.
Then if I am a father where is my honor, and if I am a master where is my fear? says Jehovah of Armies to you priests, despisers of my name and you say “In what have we despised your name?”
7 You bring polluted food up to my altar and you say “In what have we polluted you?”
In your saying “Jehovah’s table is of no account.”
8 And when you bring on a blind creature for sacrificing, it is no harm! and when you bring on a lame one, it is no harm!
Present it to your governor! will he be conciliated, or do favors for you? says Jehovah of Armies.
9 And now propitiate Deity that he may be gracious to us; this came from your hands will he favor any of you? says Jehovah of Armies.
10 Ah, and O for one among you to shut the doors so that you should not light up my altar for nothing!
I have no liking for you, says Jehovah of Armies, and will not accept offerings from your hands.
11 For from utmost east to utmost west my name is great among the nations, and in every place incense is offered up to my name, and pure offerings; for my name is great among the nations, says Jehovah of Armies;
12 but you profane it by saying “Jehovah’s table is polluted and the eating of its yield is unsatisfactory.”
13 And you say “O, the tiresomeness!” and pooh-pooh me, says Jehovah of Armies; and you bring stolen property and the lame and the sick, and bring it as an offering; am I to accept it from your hands? says Jehovah.
14 But cursed is a schemer who, when there is a male in his flock and he vows it, sacrifices a mutilated creature to the Lord; for I am a great king, says Jehovah of Armies, and my name is terrible among the nations.
2 And now this message is to you priests.
2 If you do not listen and do not pay attention, giving glory to my name, says Jehovah of Armies, I will send the curse upon you and curse your blessings; and cursed it I have, too, because you are not paying attention.
3 Here I am rebuking the seed for you and will sprinkle offal on your faces, the offal from your feasts, and they shall carry you to it.
4 And you shall know that I have sent this message to you to have my covenant be with Levi, says Jehovah of Armies.
5 My covenant with him was life and well-being, and I gave them to him; fear, and he feared me, and he was in terror at my name.
6 Trustworthy rulings were in his mouth and dishonesty was never found on his lips; he walked with me staunchly and straightforwardly, and turned many back from offending.
7 For a priest’s lips are to keep knowledge, and they seek rulings from his mouth, because he is the messenger of Jehovah of Armies.
8 But you have quitted the road, you have brought many to a fall by rulings; you have wrecked Levi’s covenant, says Jehovah of Armies,
9 and I on my part have made your status low and despised by all the people, in harmony with your not keeping my ways and favoring persons in rulings.
10 Do we not all have one father? did not one Deity create us? how is it we are faithless to our brothers, nullifying our fathers’ covenant?
11 Judah has acted faithlessly, and an abominable thing has been done in Israel and in Jerusalem; for Judah has nullified Jehovah’s sanctities which he loves and has married a foreign deity’s daughter.
12 Jehovah deprive the man who does it of waker and answerer in Jacob’s tents, and of offerer to Jehovah of Armies.
13 And this second thing you do, covering Jehovah’s altar with tears, with weeping and groaning, beyond any more possibility of facing toward the offering or having satisfaction from your hands.
14 And you say “On what account?”
On account of Jehovah’s having borne witness between you and the wife of your youth, toward whom you have broken faith, though she is your consort and your contracted spouse.
15 And did he not make one, though he had a remainder of breath? and what was the one aiming at? posterity of God.
But be on your guard as to your spirits, and let one not break faith toward the wife of his youth.
16 For Israel’s God Jehovah hates divorce, and outrage covers his garment, says Jehovah of Armies.
But be on your guard as to your spirits and do not break faith.
17 You have made it hard for Jehovah with your words.
And you say “In what have we made it hard?”
In your saying “Everybody that does bad things pleases Jehovah, he has a fancy for them or where is the God of justice?”
3 Here I am sending my messenger who shall clear a road before me, and suddenly the Lord, whom you are seeking for, will come to his temple; and the messenger of the covenant, whom you are wishing for, here he comes, says Jehovah of Armies.
2 But who will hold out through the day of his coming? or who will stand at his appearing? for he is like a smelter’s fire and like washermen’s alkali,
3 and he will sit smelting and purifying silver, and purify the sons of Levi and refine them like gold and silver, and they will be rightly offering-presenters of Jehovah’s,
4 and the offering of Judah and Jerusalem will be sweet to Jehovah as in days of yore and as in olden years; and
5 I will draw near you for judgment, and will be an expeditious witness against the wizards and adulterers and perjurers and those who fail to pay the wages of a hired man and to allow the rights of a widow and an orphan, and who warp a decision in an immigrant’s case, and do not fear me, says Jehovah of Armies.
6 For I Jehovah have not changed, and you sons of Jacob have not come to an end.
7 From your fathers’ days you have gone away from my usages and not kept them: come back to me and I will come back to you, says Jehovah of Armies.
And you say “Come back in what respect?”
8 Is man to shave down God? for you are shaving me down.
And you say “Shaving you down in what respect?”
The tithe and the contribution you neglect,
9 and me you shave down, the whole nation.
10 Bring all the tithe to the storehouse so there will be provisions in my house, and test me by this, says Jehovah of Armies, whether I will not open the hatchways of the sky for you and empty out for you more of a blessing than you have any use for;
11 and I will rebuke the eater for you, and you shall not have him spoiling the crops of the soil, nor shall you have the grapevines losing their fruit in the fields, says Jehovah of Armies.
12 And all the nations will congratulate you, because you will be a delightful country, says Jehovah of Armies.
13 You have used strong language against me, says Jehovah.
And you say “What language have we used against you?”
14 You have said “Worshiping God does not amount to anything; and what do we get out of it that we have kept his charge and gone in mourning because of Jehovah of Armies?
15 And now we are having to congratulate presumptuous people; yes, misdoers make fortunes; yes, they put God to the test and come off safe.”
16 Thus did those who fear Jehovah talk to each other; and Jehovah listened and heard it, and a commemorative book was written before him for those who fear Jehovah and those who give consideration to his name.
17 And, says Jehovah of Armies, they shall on the day when I take action be for me a special reserve, and I will spare them as a man spares his own son that serves him;
18 and you will come back to seeing the difference between a right-doer and a wrong-doer, between a worshiper and a non-worshiper of Jehovah.
4:1-6
4 For here comes the day, burning like a baking-crock; and all presumptuous people and all wrong-doers will be stubble, and the day that is coming will set them ablaze, says Jehovah of Armies, so that it will not leave them root nor branch;
2 but for you fearers of my name a sun of right will rise, with healing in its wings, and you will go out and gambol like calves out of a pen,
3 and tread the life out of the wicked, for they will be ashes under your feet on the day when I take action, says Jehovah of Armies.
4 Remember my servant Moses’s instructions that I charged him with at Horeb for all Israel, usages and laws.
5 Here, I am sending you the prophet Elijah before the coming of Jehovah’s great and terrible day,
6 and he will bring fathers’ hearts back to children and children’s back to their fathers, for fear I should come and strike the country with doom.
Zechariah
1 On the eighth new moon in the year two of Darius, Jehovah’s word came to the prophet Zecariah the son of Berekiah the son of ʽIddo, 2 “Jehovah was provoked at your fathers.
3 And say to them ‘Says Jehovah of Armies, Come back to me, quoth Jehovah of Armies, and I will come back to you, says Jehovah of Armies.
4 Do not be like your fathers, to whom the former prophets called out “Says Jehovah of Armies, Come back from your bad courses and practices” and they did not hear nor listen to me, quoth Jehovah.
5 Your fathers, where are they? and the prophets, do they live forever?
6 But my words and my decrees with which I charged my servants the prophets, did they not overtake your fathers? and they turned back and said “As Jehovah of Armies designed to do to us, in accordance with our courses and practices, so he has done with us.”’”
7 On the twenty-fourth day of the eleventh month (the month of Shebat) in the year two of Darius, Jehovah’s word came to the prophet Zecariah the son of Berekiah the son of ʽIddo,
8 “I saw last night, and there was a man riding on a brown pony standing between the myrtles in the bog, and behind him ponies brown, sorrel, and white.
9 And I said ‘What are these, sir?’ and the angel that was speaking with me said to me ‘I will let you see what these are.’
10 And the man standing between the myrtles answered ‘These are what Jehovah has sent to patrol the earth.’
11 And they answered Jehovah’s angel that stood between the myrtles ‘We have patrolled the earth and find all the earth settled and quiet.’
12 And Jehovah’s angel answered ‘Jehovah of Armies, how long before you will have any tenderness for Jerusalem and the cities of Judah, to which you have been hostile these seventy years?’
13 And Jehovah answered the angel that was speaking with me with kindly words, comforting words;
14 and the angel that was speaking with me said to me ‘Call out “Says Jehovah of Armies, I am greatly jealous for Jerusalem and Sion,
15 and I am greatly incensed with the nations that are at ease, because I had been a little incensed and they helped on to disaster.
16 So Jehovah says, I have come back to Jerusalem in tenderness; my house shall be built in it, quoth Jehovah of Armies, and a measuring-line shall be stretched over Jerusalem.”
17 Call out again “Says Jehovah of Armies, My cities shall again overflow with good things, and Jehovah will again comfort Sion and again choose Jerusalem.”’”
18 And I raised my eyes and saw, and there were four horns;
19 and I said to the angel that was speaking with me “What are these?” and he said to me “These are the horns that have scattered Judah, Israel and Jerusalem.”
20 And Jehovah showed me four smiths;
21 and I said “What are these coming to do?” and he said “These are the horns that have scattered Judah so that not a man raised his head; and these have come to sharpen blades to knock off the horns of the nations that raised horns against the country of Judah to scatter it.”
2 And I raised my eyes and saw, and there was a man with a measuring-line in his hand.
2 And I said “Where are you going?” and he said to me “To measure Jerusalem, to see how wide and how long it is.”
3 And out went the angel that was speaking with me, and another angel came out to meet him;
4 and he said to him “Run, tell yonder young man ‘Jerusalem will live the life of rural towns owing to the number of men and beasts in her;
5 and I, quoth Jehovah, will be to her a wall of fire all round, and I will be glory within her.’”
6 Ha, ha, off with you out of the north country, quoth Jehovah, because I have spread you along the four winds of the sky, quoth Jehovah.
7 Ha, make your escape to Sion, you that are living in Babylon.
8 For Jehovah of Armies says “After glory, he has sent me against the nations that were despoiling you, because he who touches you is touching the apple of his eye;
9 for here I am swinging my hand over them and they shall be booty for their slaves, and you shall know that Jehovah of Armies sent me.
10 Shout and be joyful, daughter of Sion, because here I am coming to take up my abode in your midst, quoth Jehovah,
11 and many nations will enlist under Jehovah on that day and become his people, and take up their abode in your midst, and you will know that Jehovah of Armies sent me to you.
12 And Jehovah will take Judah, his portion, as his own estate on the sacred soil, and will choose Jerusalem again.
13 Silence, all mortals, because of Jehovah, for he is astir from his holy dwelling.”
3 And he showed me High Priest Joshuaʽ standing before Jehovah’s angel, and the Adversary standing at his right to be adversary to him.
2 And He said to the Adversary “Jehovah rebuke you, Adversary, Jehovah that chooses Jerusalem rebuke you this is a brand pulled out of a fire!”
3 And Joshuaʽ was wearing filthy garments and standing before the angel;
4 and He answered by saying to those who stood before Him “Take the filthy garments off him” (and He said to him “See, I cause the guilt that was on you to pass away”) “and dress him in full-dress garments,
5 and place a clean tiara on his head”; and they placed the clean tiara on his head and dressed him in garments while Jehovah’s angel stood there.
6 And Jehovah’s angel admonished Joshuaʽ
7 “Says Jehovah of Armies, If you walk in my ways and keep my charge, then it shall be yours to pronounce judgment for my house and to keep my courts, and I will give you free passage between those who stand here.
8 Listen, High Priest Joshuaʽ, you and your colleagues who sit before you, for they are men of portent; for here I am bringing in my servant New Growth.
9 For here is the stone I have put before Joshuaʽ, on one stone seven eyes; here I am going to engrave its marking, quoth Jehovah of Armies, and dislodge the guilt of this country in one day.
10 On that day, quoth Jehovah of Armies, you shall each invite another to come under vine and fig-tree.”
4:1-14
4 And the angel who spoke with me came back and roused me like a man that is roused from sleep,
2 and said to me “What do you see?” and I said “I see a lampstand there, all gold, with its bowl at its top and its seven lamps on it, and seven pipes, for the lamps on top of it,
3 and two olive-trees over it, one on the right of the bowl and one on the left.” 4 And I answered by saying to the angel that was speaking with me “What are these, sir?”
5 and the angel that was speaking with me answered me “Do you not know what these are?” and I said “No, sir.”
6 And he answered me “This is Jehovah’s word to Zerubbabel, ‘Not my resources nor by strength but by my spirit, says Jehovah of Armies.’
7 For I will make the great mountain into a plain before Zerubbabel, and he shall bring out the headstone among shouts ‘fine! fine!’”
8 And Jehovah’s word came to me
9 “Zerubbabel’s hands laid the foundation of this house, and his hands shall finish off; and you shall know that Jehovah of Armies sent me to you.
10 For who despises the day of little things? and they will rejoice and see the designated stone in Zerubbabel’s hand.
These seven are Jehovah’s eyes ranging through all the earth.”
11 And I answered him “What are these two olive-trees to right and left of the lampstand?”
12 and I answered him a second time “What are the two olive-spikes adjoining the two gold spouts that pour the gold off them?”
13 And he said to me “Do you not know what these are?” and I said “No, sir.”
14 And he said “These are the two sons of oil that stand by the Lord of all the earth.”
5:1-11
5 And once more I raised my eyes and saw, and there was a document flying.
2 And he said to me “What do you see?” and I said “I see a document flying, thirty feet long and fifteen wide.”
3 And he said to me “This is the anathema that is going out all over the country; for every stealer will be cleared out on this side in accordance with it and every swearer will be cleared out on that side in accordance with it.
4 I put it out, quoth Jehovah of Armies, and it will go into the thief’s house and into the house of the one who swears by my name to a lie, and it will lodge inside the house and make an end of it wood and stones and all.”
5 And the angel that was speaking with me came out and said to me “Raise your eyes and see what this is that is going out.”
6 And I said “What is that?”
And he said “This is the bushel that is going out”; and he said “This is their guilt throughout the country.”
7 And there a disk of lead lifted itself up, and there sitting inside the bushel was a woman.
8 And he said “This is Wickedness” and threw her into the bushel and threw the block of lead on its mouth.
9 And I raised my eyes and saw, and there were two women coming out, with wind in their wings; they had wings like a stork’s.
And they carried the bushel up between the earth and the sky,
10 and I said to the angel that was speaking with me “Where are they taking the bushel to?”
11 and he said to me “To build it a house in Shinear, and have a base ready, and they will set it down there on its base.”
6 And once more I raised my eyes and saw, and there were four chariots coming out from between the two mountains; and the mountains were of bronze.
2 In the first chariot were brown ponies, and in the second chariot black ponies,
3 and in the third chariot white ponies, and in the fourth chariot strong dappled ponies.
4 And I answered by saying to the angel that was speaking with me “What are these, sir?”
5 and the angel answered me “These are the four winds of the sky coming out from presenting themselves before the Lord of all the earth.
6 The one with the black ponies in it, they were going out to the north country, and the white went out to a part behind them, and the dappled went out to the south country;
7 and the brown went out and wanted to go walking back and forth in the earth, and he said to them ‘Walk back and forth in the earth,’ and they did.”
8 And he called me up and spoke to me, saying “See, those that were going out to the north country have laid my spirit in the north country.”
9 And Jehovah’s word came to me, 10 “Take from the emigrants out of Heldai, from Tobijah and from Jedaiah, and go in yourself and go in into the house of Josiah the son of Sephaniah, who have come from Babylon,
11 and take silver and gold and make a crown and place on the head of High Priest Joshuaʽ the son of Josadak,
12 and say to him ‘Says Jehovah of Armies, Here is a man named New Growth, and he shall grow new in his place and build Jehovah’s temple.
13 And he shall build Jehovah’s temple, and he shall take on majesty and shall sit and rule on his throne, and there shall be a priest at his right hand, and there shall be peaceable policy between the two.’”
14 And Helem and Tobijah and Jedaʽiah, and the graciousness of the son of Sephaniah, shall have the crown for a memorial in Jehovah’s temple;
15 and far-off men shall come and build on Jehovah’s temple, and you shall know that Jehovah of Armies sent me to you; and if you shall obey your God Jehovah
7:1-14
7 And in the year four of King Darius Jehovah’s word came to Zecariah on the fourth of the ninth month, in Kislev;
2 and Bethel sent Shareser and Regem-Melec and his men to propitiate Jehovah, 3 to say to the priests of the house of Jehovah of Armies and to the prophets “Are we to weep in the fifth month with devotee observances as we have been doing ever so many years?”
4 And the word of Jehovah of Armies came to me 5 “Say to all the people of the country and to the priests ‘When you fasted and wailed in the fifth and seventh months these seventy years were you fasting me? 6 and when you eat, and when you drink, is it not you that eat and drink? 7 Are not these the words Jehovah proclaimed by the former prophets while Jerusalem was settled and quiet, and her cities around her, and the South and the lowland settled,
8 The word of Jehovah again came to Zechariah, saying: 9 “Says Jehovah of Armies, Give true verdicts and practice friendliness and sympathy, brother with brother,
10 and do not deny justice to widow and orphan, immigrant and penniless man, and do not think up harm for a brother”? 11 and they refused to listen and turned a stubborn shoulder and a deaf ear,
12 and made their hearts adamant against listening to the instructions and messages that Jehovah of Armies had sent by his spirit through the former prophets, and there was great wrath from Jehovah of Armies.
13 And as he called and they did not hear, so, says Jehovah of Armies, will they call and I not hear.
14 And I blew them away to all the nations they had never known, and the country lay desolate behind them without goer or comer. And they rendered a charming country a desolation.’”
8:1-23
8 And Jehovah’s word came to me 2 “Says Jehovah of Armies, I am greatly jealous for Sion, very resentfully jealous.
3 Says Jehovah, I have come back to Sion and will dwell within Jerusalem; and Jerusalem shall be called ‘the loyal city’ and ‘the city of Jehovah of Armies, the sacred city.’
4 Says Jehovah of Armies, Again shall old men and old women sit in the squares of Jerusalem, each with staff in hand for length of years;
5 and the squares of the city will be full of boys and girls playing in its squares.
6 Says Jehovah of Armies, Because it looks impossible to the remnant of this people in those days is it to look impossible to me too? quoth Jehovah of Armies.
7 “Says Jehovah of Armies, Here, I am saving my people out of the East and out of the West,
8 and bringing them in where they are to settle inside of Jerusalem; and I will have them for my people, and they shall have me for their God, loyally and honestly.
9 “Says Jehovah of Armies, Courage, you that in these days hear these words from the mouths of the prophets who spoke on the day of the founding of Jehovah of Armies’ house, the temple, to be built;
10 for before those days there had not come any pay for man and there was no pay for beast, and goer and comer had no peace from the foe, and I set all mankind man against man.
11 But now I am not as I was in the former days toward the remnant of this people, quoth Jehovah of Armies;
12 for I will sow peace, the vines shall give their fruit and the earth its growth and the sky its dew, and I will allot all this to the remnant of this people;
13 and as you have been a word of cursing among the nations, house of Judah and house of Israel, so I will save you and you shall be a blessing; do not be afraid, courage!
14 For Jehovah of Armies says, As I designed to do bad things to you when your fathers incensed me, says Jehovah of Armies, and I did not change my mind, 15 so I have in these days come back and design to do good to Jerusalem and the house of Judah; do not be afraid.
16 These are the things you are to do: speak truth to each other, give judgments true in fact and sound in law in your gates,
17 and do not think up harm for each other in your minds, and do not love a false oath; for all these things I hate, quoth Jehovah.”
18 And Jehovah of Armies’ word came to me 19 “Says Jehovah of Armies, The fourth-month fast and the fifth-month fast and the seventh-month fast and the tenth-month fast shall become rejoicings and merry-makings and happy occasions for the house of Judah; so love truth and peace.
20 Says Jehovah of Armies, Peoples and the inhabitants of many cities shall yet come in,
21 and the inhabitants of one shall go to another saying ‘Yes, let us go to propitiate Jehovah, to look up Jehovah of Armies; I will go too.’
22 And many peoples and mighty nations shall come to look up Jehovah of Armies at Jerusalem and to propitiate Jehovah.
23 Says Jehovah of Armies, In those days ten men out of all the languages of the nations shall take hold of the flap of a Jewish man’s coat saying ‘Let us go with you, because we have heard you have God with you.’”
9:1-17
9 The boding of Jehovah’s word in Hadrac, its resting-place Damascus; for Jehovah’s are the eyes of mankind, and all the tribes of Israel;
2 Hamath too, bordering on it; Tyre and Sidon, very wise as they are.
3 And Tyre built itself siege-works and piled up silver like earth and hard gold like street mud.
4 Here Jehovah will dispossess her and knock her wealth into the sea, and she will be consumed by fire.
5 Ashkelon will see and be afraid; Ghaza, and be utterly unmanned; and ʽEkron, because her cynosure has come to grief and king is lost to Ghaza; and Ashkelon will be uninhabited.
6 And a mongrel rabble will live in Ashdod, and I will abolish the Philistines’ pride;
7 and I will take out its blood from its mouth and its carrion from between its teeth, and it too will be left belonging to our God, and be like a privileged guest in Judah, and ʽEkron like a Jebusite.
8 And I will camp as garrison for my house against comer and goer, and never again shall a coercer pass through them; for now I have seen with my own eyes.
9 Jubilate most gayly, daughter of Sion; cheer, daughter of Jerusalem; here you shall have your kind come in; just and victorious is he, poor and mounted on a donkey, on a young beast born of donkeys.
10 And he will abolish chariots from Ephraim and ponies from Jerusalem, and war-bows will be abolished, and he will pronounce peace to the nations; and his rule will be from sea to sea and from River to ends of earth.
11 Your prisoners too for your covenant blood I have let go out of the dry cistern.
12 The prisoners of hope shall come back to you, Sion, today too; double dower I will bring back to you.
13 For I have bent Judah for my bow, put Ephraim in for arrow; and I will rouse your sons, Sion, against the sons of Greece, and make you like a champion’s sword.
14 And Jehovah will appear over them, and his arrow will go out like the lightning; and the Lord Jehovah will blow the ram-horn and go with southern tempests.
15 Jehovah of Armies will shield them, and they will eat up and stamp down slingstones and drink their blood like wine, and be filled like a sacrificer’s bowl, like the corners of an altar,
16 and their God Jehovah will give them the victory.
On that day his people’s sheep will be like sparkling diadem-stones over his soil.
17 For how good and what a beauty-giver is he! grain will ripen young men, grape-juice maidens.
10:1-12
10 Ask Jehovah for rain at spring-rain time, Jehovah who makes chain-lightning, and he will give you rain in bursts so there will be herbage on the range.
2 For the teraphim have spoken rubbish and the soothsayers have visioned a lie, and they tell futile dreams, give unsubstantial comfort; therefore they stray like sheep, go hungry because there is no shepherd.
3 Against the shepherds I am angry, and the he-goats I will punish.
For Jehovah of Armies has visited his flock the house of Judah and will make them like ponies whose passion is for battle.
4 From him headman, from him staff, from him war-bow, from him will come every officer together.
5 And they will be like champions trampling through street mud in battle; and they will fight, because Jehovah is with them, and discomfit pony-riders.
6 And I will invigorate the house of Judah, and save the house of Joseph and bring them back, because I have tender feelings for them, and they will be as if I had not repudiated them; for I am their God Jehovah and will answer them.
7 And Ephraim will be like a champion, and their hearts will be merry as if with wine; and their sons will see and be merry, and their hearts will jubilate in Jehovah.
8 I will whistle for them and collect them, because I have ransomed them; and there shall be as many of them as there had been;
9 and I will sow them among the peoples, and in the distant places they will remember me and come to life with their sons and come back.
10 And I will bring them back from Egypt and collect them from Assyria, and bring them to Gilead and Lebanon, and there will be no finding any place for them.
11 And they will go through the sea in distress, and he will strike waves into the sea and dry out all the bogs of the Nile, and Assyria’s pride will be brought down and Egypt’s cudgel will pass away;
12 and I will give them vigor in Jehovah, and in his name they shall triumph, quoth Jehovah.
11:1-17
11 Lebanon, open your doors for fire to eat among your cedars.
2 Howl, cypress, because a cedar has fallen, that parklands are ravaged! howl, Bashan oaks, because the Basor bush is down!
3 I hear the shepherds howling because their park-realm is ravaged; I hear the two-year-old lions roaring because the Jordan jungle is ravaged.
4 Said my God Jehovah, “Shepherd the slaughtering sheep,
5 whose buyers kill and are not responsible, and whose sellers say ‘Bless Jehovah, I have been getting rich,’ and whose shepherds have no mercy on them;
6 for I will no longer have mercy on the inhabitants of the earth, quoth Jehovah.
Here I am handing mankind over to each other and to their respective kings, and they will pound the earth up, and I will not deliver out of their hands.”
7 And I shepherded the slaughtering sheep for the sheep-traders; I got myself two staves, one of which I called Goodwill and the other Ties, and shepherded the sheep.
8 And I killed off the three shepherds in one month; and I lost patience with them, and they on their part were disgusted with me.
9 And I said “I will not shepherd you: what dies shall die and what is missing shall be missing, and what remains shall eat each other’s flesh”;
10 and I took my staff Goodwill and chopped it in two, to break the terms I had come to with all the peoples,
11 and they were broken on that day; and the sheep-traders who were watching me knew it was Jehovah’s word.
12 And I said to them “If you think best, give me my pay; if not, don’t”; and they weighed out my pay, thirty shekels of silver.
13 And Jehovah said to me “Throw it to the treasury, the grand valuation I got out of them”; and I threw it in Jehovah’s house, to the treasury.
14 And I chopped my second staff in two, Ties, to break the brotherhood between Judah and Israel.
15 And Jehovah said to me “Take a shepherd’s outfit again, an incompetent one’s.
16 For here I am setting up in the country a shepherd who will not attend to what is missing nor hunt up what strays nor cure what breaks a leg nor feed what is on its feet, but eat the flesh of what is fat and tear their hoofs.
17 Woe to my sham shepherd who quits the sheep! a sword on his arm and on his right eye! his arm shall dry out and his right eye shall go dim.
12:1-14
12 The boding of Jehovah’s word about Israel.
Quoth Jehovah who stretched sky and founded earth and shaped man’s spirit within him:
2 Here I am setting Jerusalem as a staggering-bowl for all the peoples around, and Judah too will be involved in the siege against Jerusalem.
3 And on that day I will set Jerusalem as a loading-stone for all the peoples; all who load themselves with it will rupture themselves; and all the nations on earth will come together against Jerusalem.
4 On that day, quoth Jehovah, I will strike every pony with the staggers and its rider with frenzy, and on the house of Judah I will open my eyes but I will strike every pony of the peoples with blindness;
5 and the allufs of Judah will say to themselves “The inhabitants of Jerusalem have might in their God Jehovah of Armies.”
6 On that day I will make the allufs of Judah like a pan of fire among wood and like a torch of fire in hay, and to right and to left they shall consume all the peoples around; and Jerusalem shall again be inhabited on its site, in Jerusalem.
7 And Jehovah will save the tents of Judah first, in order that the vaunting of the house of David and of the inhabitants of Jerusalem may not put on airs against Judah.
8 On that day Jehovah will shield the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the most limping one among them will be like David, and the house of David like God, like Jehovah’s Angel before them.
9 And on that day I will set to work to root out all the nations that come against Jerusalem.
10 And I will pour upon the house of David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem a spirit of grace and of supplication; and they will look at the one they stabbed to death and wail over him like the wailing over an only son, and be in agony over him as one is over a firstborn.
11 On that day the wailing will be great in Jerusalem, like the bewailing of Hadadrimmon on the Megiddo bottom-lands,
12 and the country will wail clan by clan separately: the clan of the house of David separately and their women separately, the clan of the house of Nathan separately and their women separately, 13 the clan of the house of Levi separately and their women separately, the clan of the house of Shimei separately and their women separately, 14 all the remaining clans clan by clan separately and their women separately.
13:1-9
13 There will be on that day a fountain opened for the house of David and for the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and for pollution.
2 And on that day, quoth Jehovah, I will abolish the names of the idols out of the country, and they will not be mentioned anymore; and the prophets too, and the tainting spirit, I will have pass away from the country.
3 And when a man does still prophesy, his father and mother who gave him birth will say to him “You shall not live, because you have spoken falsehood in Jehovah’s name,” and his father and mother who gave him birth will stab him to death for his prophesying.
4 And on that day the prophets will be ashamed of their visions when they prophesy, and will not wear a hairy mantle with lying intent;
5 and one will say “I am not a prophet, I am a man that works the soil, because the soil has been my living from my boyhood”;
6 and one will say to him “What are these wounds between your hands?” and he will say “What I got in my lovers’ house.”
7 Sword, wake against my shepherd and against a man my neighbor! quoth Jehovah of Armies.
Strike the shepherd and the sheep will scatter and I will bring my hand back against the smallest.
8 And in all the country, quoth Jehovah, two parts will be swept away, will perish, and a third will be left in it;
9 and I will bring the third into the fire and smelt them like smelting silver and assay them like assaying gold.
It will call on my name, and I will answer it and say “It is my people,” and it will say “Jehovah is my God.”
14:1-21
14 Here, Jehovah has a day coming, and the booty from you, Jerusalem, will be divided inside you.
2 And I will bring all the nations together to Jerusalem for battle; and the city will be taken and the houses pillaged and the women ravished.
And half the city will go out in deportation, but the rest of the people will not be ousted from the city.
3 And Jehovah will go out and fight those nations as he fights on a day of battle,
4 and his feet will stand on the Mount of Olives that day, the mountain in front of Jerusalem on the east, and the Mount of Olives will split in halves from east to west in a very great valley, and half the mountain will move off to the north and half to the south,
5 and the valley of Hinnom will be choked for the valley of Hinnom lies along its side, and will be choked as it was in consequence of the earthquake in the time of King ʽUzzijah of Judah and my God Jehovah will come and all his holy ones with him.
6 And on that day there will not be light and cold and frost;
7 and it will be all one day Jehovah knows about it not day and not night; and at evening time there will be light.
8 And on that day living water will go out from Jerusalem, half to the eastern sea and half to the western; this will be in summer and in winter.
9 And Jehovah will become king over all the earth; on that day Jehovah will be one and his name one.
10 All the country will go round like the Rift Valley, from Gebaʽ to Rimmon of the South; and Jerusalem will tower up and stay where it was, from the Benjamin Gate to the place of the former gate, to the Corner Gate and Hananel’s Tower, to the King’s Winepresses.
11 And they will live in it, and there will be no more doom, and Jerusalem will rest secure.
12 And this will be the plague that Jehovah will inflict on all the peoples that made the campaign against Jerusalem: rotting one’s flesh while he stands on his feet, and his eyes rotting in their sockets and his tongue rotting in his mouth.
13 And on that day there will be a great confusion from Jehovah among them, and they will hold each other’s hands and their hands will be raised against each other,
14 and even Judah will fight Jerusalem. And the wealth of all the nations around will be brought in, gold and silver and clothing in great quantities.
15 And the same will be the plague of the ponies, the mules, the camels, the donkeys, and all the beasts that there shall be in those camps, like this plague.
16 And everybody that is left of all the nations that had come against Jerusalem will come up annually to do reverence to the King, Jehovah of Armies, and to keep the Feast of Booths.
17 And whoever in the clans of the earth does not come up to Jerusalem to do reverence to the King, Jehovah of Armies, on them there will be no showers;
18 and if the clan of Egypt does not come up and come in, on them will be the plague which Jehovah will inflict on the nations that do not come up to keep the Feast of Booths.
19 This will be the penalty for Egypt and the penalty for all the nations that do not come up to keep the Feast of Booths.
20 On that day the ponies will have on their jinglets “Sacred to Jehovah,” and the pots in Jehovah’s house will be like the bowls before the altar;
21 and every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah will be sacred to Jehovah of Armies, and all the sacrificers will go in and take any of them and cook in them.
And there will no longer be a trader in Jehovah of Armies’ house on that day.
